1376860_FM_Carr

4/10/01

4:57 PM

Page i

Practical
Antenna
Handbook

1376860_FM_Carr

4/10/01

4:57 PM

Page ii

Other Books by Joseph J. Carr
DC Power Supplies
Old Time Radios! Restoration and Repair
Secrets of RF Circuit Design

1376860_FM_Carr

4/10/01

4:57 PM

Page iii

Practical
Antenna
Handbook
Fourth Edition

Joseph J. Carr

McGraw-Hill
New York Chicago San Francisco Lisbon London
Madrid Mexico City Milan New Delhi San Juan Seoul
Singapore Sydney Toronto

Copyright 2001 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. All rights reserved. Manufactured in the United
States of America. Except as permitted under the United States Copyright Act of 1976, no part of this
publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a database or retrieval
system, without the prior written permission of the publisher.

0-07-138931-8
The material in this eBook also appears in the print version of this title: 0-07-137435-3.
All trademarks are trademarks of their respective owners. Rather than put a trademark symbol after every
occurrence of a trademarked name, we use names in an editorial fashion only, and to the benefit of the
trademark owner, with no intention of infringement of the trademark. Where such designations appear in this
book, they have been printed with initial caps.
McGraw-Hill eBooks are available at special quantity discounts to use as premiums and sales promotions, or
for use in corporate training programs. For more information, please contact George Hoare, Special Sales, at
george_hoare@mcgraw-hill.com or (212) 904-4069.
TERMS OF USE
This is a copyrighted work and The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. (“McGraw-Hill”) and its licensors reserve
all rights in and to the work. Use of this work is subject to these terms. Except as permitted under the
Copyright Act of 1976 and the right to store and retrieve one copy of the work, you may not decompile,
disassemble, reverse engineer, reproduce, modify, create derivative works based upon, transmit, distribute,
disseminate, sell, publish or sublicense the work or any part of it without McGraw-Hills prior consent. You
may use the work for your own noncommercial and personal use; any other use of the work is strictly
prohibited. Your right to use the work may be terminated if you fail to comply with these terms.
THE WORK IS PROVIDED “AS IS.” McGRAW-HILL AND ITS LICENSORS MAKE NO
GUARANTEES OR WARRANTIES AS TO THE ACCURACY, ADEQUACY OR COMPLETENESS OF
OR RESULTS TO BE OBTAINED FROM USING THE WORK, INCLUDING ANY INFORMATION
THAT CAN BE ACCESSED THROUGH THE WORK VIA HYPERLINK OR OTHERWISE, AND
EXPRESSLY DISCLAIM ANY WARRANTY, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
PURPOSE. McGraw-Hill and its licensors do not warrant or guarantee that the functions contained in the
work will meet your requirements or that its operation will be uninterrupted or error free. Neither McGrawHill nor its licensors shall be liable to you or anyone else for any inaccuracy, error or omission, regardless of
cause, in the work or for any damages resulting therefrom. McGraw-Hill has no responsibility for the content
of any information accessed through the work. Under no circumstances shall McGraw-Hill and/or its
licensors be liable for any indirect, incidental, special, punitive, consequential or similar damages that result
from the use of or inability to use the work, even if any of them has been advised of the possibility of such
damages. This limitation of liability shall apply to any claim or cause whatsoever whether such claim or cause
arises in contract, tort or otherwise.
DOI: 10.1036/0071389318

1376860_FM_Carr

4/10/01

4:57 PM

Page v

Dedication
Dedicated in memoriam to Johnnie Harper Thorne, K4NFU:
a friend and colleague for nearly 30 years who is sorely missed.
Johnnie was a genius who knew some real smoke about antennas.
Killed by a drunk driver. . .

From the Publisher
The fourth edition of this book is published in memory of Joe Carr who
passed away shortly after completing his manuscript. Joe was a valuable
member of the McGraw-Hill family of authors and the electronics
community as a whole. He will be missed by us all.
Scott L. Grillo
Editor-in-Chief

v

This page intentionally left blank

1376860_FM_Carr

4/10/01

4:57 PM

Page vii

Contents
Introduction to the Fourth Edition ix
1 Introduction to Radio Broadcasting and
Communications 1
2 Radio-wave Propagation 5
3 Transmission Lines 59
4 The Smith Chart 95
5 Fundamentals of Radio Antennas 123
6 High-Frequency Dipole and Other Doublet Antennas 141
7 Vertically Polarized HF Antennas 173
8 Multiband and Tunable-Wire Antennas 203
9 Longwire Directional Antennas 213
10 Hidden and Limited-Space Antennas 231
11 Directional Phased Vertical Antennas 245
12 Directional Beam Antennas 255

vii

viii

Contents

13 Antennas for Shortwave Reception 271
14 Large Wire Loop Antennas 287
15 Small Loop Receiving Antennas 299
16 Small Transmitting Loop Antennas 319
17 Antenna Modeling Software 327
18 VHF/UHF Transmitting and Receiving Antennas 339
19 Microwave Waveguides and Antennas 369
20 Antenna Noise Temperature 417
21 Antennas for Radio Astronomy 421
22 Adjusting, Installing, and Troubleshooting Antennas and
Transmission Lines 433
23 Antennas for Radio Direction Finding (RDF) 439
24 Impedence Matching in Antenna Systems 457
25 Mobile, Emergency, Portable, and Marine Antennas 479
26 Antennas for Low-Frequency Operation 501
27 Measurement and Adjustment Techniques 515
28 General Antenna Mechanical Construction Techniques 543
29 Grounding the Antenna: What Is a Good Ground? 573
Index 583
McGraw-Hill Terms of Use

1376860_FM_Carr

4/10/01

4:57 PM

Page ix

Introduction to
the fourth edition
IT WAS WITH GREAT PLEASURE THAT I WROTE THIS FOURTH EDITION OF PRACTICAL
Antenna Handbook. The original intent when the first edition was planned was to
provide the reader with a practical, yet theoretical, book that could be used with
only a minimal effort to actually design and install radio antennas. It was assumed
that the readership would possess a wide range of levels of antenna sophistication,
from the novice “newbie” to the professional engineer. That assumption proved to be
correct as I have received letters from a wide variety of people.
The success of the three previous editions of Practical Antenna Handbook has
been most gratifying. Clerks in radio stores told me that this book was outselling
other titles 2:1. They confirmed that the types of people who buy the book meet the
profile above. It was with surprise and delight that I noted that clerks in one radio
store could cite the McGraw-Hill catalog number from memory, when they could not
do that for other antenna books.
While the sales are deeply appreciated (they are an honor), there was one comment that stood out. The salesman at one radio store introduced me to an instructor
from a U.S. Government communications school. He typically bought twenty copies
of Practical Antenna Handbook at a time for use by his students in a training class.
He told me that the reason why he selected my book over others was “...it’s the only
book on the market that people can give to a secretary, or clerk-typist, and expect
them to be able to put up a working half-wavelength dipole two hours later.” And, he
stated, in his business that could literally happen any time.
ix

1376860_FM_Carr

4/10/01

4:57 PM

Page x

x Introduction to fourth edition
Antennas have changed a lot over the years. Figure I-1 shows how antennas
were between 1913 and 1940. This facility was the first U.S. Navy radio station
(NAA) in Arlington, VA.1 Those two 600- and 400-ft towers were taken down in 1940
to make room for National Airport (Washington, D.C.). The towers were reassembled in Annapolis, MD, where they lasted until recently.
Antenna technology has changed since 1940. In preparing this fourth edition of
Practical Antenna Handbook all previous material was reviewed for accuracy and
relevance. Additional material was added for the following topics:
• Wire antenna construction methods
• Antenna modeling software (miniNEC, WinNEC, and EZNEC for Windows)
• Antenna noise temperature
• Antennas for radio astronomy
• Antennas for Radio Direction Finding
I hope that you find this fourth edition as useful as the previous three editions.
And thank you very much for honoring me by spending your hard-earned money on
my book.
Joseph J. Carr, MSEE
1 The NAA callsign has since been reassigned to the VLF station at Cutler, ME.

1376860_FM_Carr

4/10/01

4:57 PM

Page xi

Introduction to fourth edition xi

I-1 Massive antenna towers at Navy “Radio Arlington” (1913-1940). (Courtesy of

the NAA.)

This page intentionally left blank

1

CHAPTER

Introduction to
radio broadcasting
and communications
RADIO BROADCASTING AND COMMUNICATIONS SEEMS TO HOLD A STRANGE KIND OF

magical allure that attracts a wide variety of people and holds them for years. There
is something fascinating about the ability to project yourself over vast intercontinental distances.
Radio communications have been with us now for the entire twentieth century
and into the twenty-first. Experiments are on record as early as 1867, and by the turn
of the century “wireless telegraphy” (as radio was called then) sparked the imaginations of countless people across the world. Radio communications began in earnest,
however, when Guglielmo Marconi successfully demonstrated wireless telegraphy as
a commercially viable entity. The “wireless” aspect to radio so radically changed communications that the word is still used to denote radio communications in many countries of the world. Marconi made a big leap to international fame on a cold December
day in 1903, when he and a team of colleagues successfully demonstrated transatlantic wireless telegraphy. Until that time, wireless was a neighborhood—or crosstown at best—endeavor that was of limited usefulness. Of course, ships close to
shore, or each other, could summon aid in times of emergency, but the ability to communicate over truly long distances was absent. All that changed on that fateful day in
Newfoundland when Marconi heard the Morse letter “S” tickle his ears.
Wireless telegraphy was pressed into service by shipping companies because it
immediately provided an element of safety that was missing in the prewireless days.
Indeed, a ship that sank, leaving its crew and passengers afloat on a forbidding sea,
was alone. Any survivors often succumbed to the elements before a chance encounter with a rescue vessel. Some early shipping companies advertised that their
ships were safer because of wireless aboard. It was not until 1909, however, that
wireless telegraphy proved its usefulness on the high seas. Two ships collided in the
foggy Atlantic Ocean and were sinking. All passengers and crew members of both
ships were in imminent danger of death in the icy waters. But radio operator Jack

Copyright 2001 - the McGraw-Hill Companies

1

Chap01_Carr

4/11/01

10:02 AM

Page 2

2 Introduction to radio broadcasting and communications
Binns became the first man in history to send out a maritime distress call. There is
some debate over which distress call Binns transmitted, but one thing is certain: It
was not “SOS” (today’s distress call), because SOS was not adopted until later. Binns
probably transmitted either “CQD” or “CQE,” both of which were recognized in
those days before standardization. Regardless of which call was sent, however, it was
received and relayed from ship to ship, allowing another vessel to come to the aid of
the stricken pair of ships.
All radio prior to about 1916 was carried on via telegraphy (i.e., the on-off keying of
a radio signal in the Morse code). But in 1916 some more magic happened. On a little
hill in Arlington, Virginia, on a site that now overlooks the Pentagon and the U.S. Marine
Corps base called Henderson Hall, there were (and still are) a pair of two-story brick
buildings housing the naval radio station NAA (callsign since reassigned to the VLF station at Cutler, ME). On a night in 1916, radio operators and monitors up and down the
Atlantic seaboard—from the midwest to the coast and out to sea for hundreds of
miles—heard something that must have startled them out of their wits, for crackling out
of the “ether,” amidst the whining of Alexanderson alternators and “ZZZCHHT” of
spark-gap transmitters, came a new sound—a human voice. Engineers and scientists at
the Naval Research Laboratory had transmitted the first practical amplitude-modulated
(AM) radio signal. Earlier attempts, prior to 1910, had been successful as scientific
experiments, but they did not use commercially viable equipment.
Although radio activity in the early years was unregulated and chaotic, today it
is quite heavily regulated. Order was brought to the bands (don’t laugh, ye who tune
the shortwaves) that was lacking before. Internationally radio is regulated by the International Telecommunications Union (ITU) in Geneva, Switzerland through the
treaties arising from World Administrative Radio Conferences (WARC) held every
10 to 15 years. In the United States, radio communications are regulated by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), headquartered in Washington, D.C.
Amateur radio has grown from a few thousand “hams” prior to World War I to
more than 900,000 today, about one-third of them in the United States. Amateur operators were ordered off the air during World War I, and almost did not make a comeback after the war. There were, by that time, many powerful commercial interests
that greedily coveted the frequencies used by amateurs, and they almost succeeded
in keeping postwar amateurs off the air. But the amateurs won the dispute, at least
partially. In those days, it was the frequencies with wavelengths longer than 200 m
(i.e., 20 to 1500 kHz) that were valuable for communications.
The cynical attitude attributed to the commercial interests regarding amateurs
was, “put ’em on 200 meters and below . . . they’ll never get out of their backyards
there!” But there was a surprise in store for those commercial operators, because the
wavelengths shorter than 200 m are in the high-frequency region that we now call
“shortwaves.” Today, the shortwaves are well-known for their ability to communicate
over transcontinental distances, but in 1919 that ability was not suspected.
I once heard an anecdote from an amateur operator “who was there.” In the
summer of 1921 this man owned a large, beautiful wire “flattop” antenna array for
frequencies close to 200 m on his family’s farm in southwestern Virginia. Using
those frequencies he was used to communicating several hundred miles into eastern
Ohio and down to the Carolinas. But, in September 1921 he went to college to study

Chap01_Carr

4/11/01

10:02 AM

Page 3

Introduction to radio broadcasting and communications 3
electrical engineering at the University of Virginia in Charlottesville. When he returned home for Thanksgiving he noticed that his younger brother had replaced the
long flattop array with a short dipole antenna. He was furious, but managed through
great effort to contain the anger until after dinner. Confronting his brother over the
incredible sacrilege, he was told that they no longer used 150 to 200 m, but rather
were using 40 m instead. Everyone “knew” that 40 m was useless for communications
over more than a few blocks, so (undoubtedly fuming) the guy took a turn at the key.
He sent out a “CQ” (general call) and was answered by a station with a callsign like
“8XX.” Thinking that the other station was in the 8th U.S. call district (WV, OH, MI)
he asked him to relay a message to a college buddy in Cincinnati, OH. The other station replied in the affirmative, but suggested that “. . . you are in a better
position to reach Cincinnati than me, I am FRENCH 8XX.” (Callsigns in 1921 did not
have national prefixes that are used today.) The age of international amateur communications had arrived! And with it came a new problem—the national identifiers in
call signs became necessary (which is why American call signs begin with K, W, or N).
During the 1930s, radio communications and broadcasting spread like wildfire
as technology and techniques improved. World War II became the first war to be
fought with extensive electronics. Immediately prior to the war, the British developed a new weapon called RADAR (radio detection and ranging; now spelled radar).
This tool allowed them to see and be forewarned of German aircraft streaming across
the English Channel to strike targets in the United Kingdom. The German planes
were guided by (then sophisticated) wireless highways in the sky, while British fighters defended the home island by radio vectoring from ground controllers. With night
fighters equipped with the first “centimetric” (i.e., microwave) radar, the Royal Air
Force was able to strike the invaders accurately—even at night. The first kill occurred one dark, foggy, moonless night when a Beaufighter closed on a spot in the
sky where the radar in the belly of the plane said an enemy plane was flying. Briefly
thinking he saw a form in the fog, the pilot cut loose a burst from his quad mount of
20-mm guns slung in the former bomb bay. Nothing. Thinking that the new toy had
failed, the pilot returned to base—only to be told that ground observers had reported that a German Heinkle bomber fell from the overcast sky at the exact spot
where the pilot had his ghostly encounter.
Radio, television, radar, and a wide variety of services, are available today under
the general rubric “radio communications and broadcasting.” Homeowners, and
other nonprofessionals in radio, can own a receiver system in their backyard that
picks up television and radio signals from satellites in geosynchronous orbit 23,000 mi
out in space. Amateur operators are able to communicate worldwide on low power,
and have even launched their own “OSCAR” satellites.
Some people had written off the HF radio spectrum in recent years, citing satellite technology as the reason. But the no-code license for amateur radio operators,
which does not carry HF privileges, has proven to be a stepping stone to higherclass licenses, which do. Also, the shortwave broadcasting market received a
tremendous boost during the Gulf War. When the troops of Operation Desert
Shield and Desert Storm were assembling to take back Kuwait from the Iraqis, the
sales of shortwave receivers jumped dramatically. And, following January 16, 1991,
when the forces started pouring across the border into the actual fight, the sales

Chap01_Carr

4/11/01

10:02 AM

Page 4

4 Introduction to radio broadcasting and communications
skyrocketed out of sight. One dealer told me that he couldn’t keep receivers in
stock, and that he had sold out most models. That interest seems to have matured
into long-term interest on the part of a significant number of listeners and new
ham operators.
The antenna is arguably one of the most important parts of the receiving and/or
transmitting station (Fig. 1-1). That is what this book is all about.

1-1 This AM/FM broadcast antenna
tower bristles with two-way
antennas.

2

CHAPTER

Radio-wave propagation
THE PROPAGATION OF RADIO SIGNALS IS NOT THE SIMPLE MATTER THAT IT SEEMS AT

first glance. Intuitively, radio signal propagation seems similar to light propagation;
after all, light and radio signals are both electromagnetic waves. But simple inverse
square law predictions, based on the optics of visible light, fall down radically at radio frequencies because other factors come into play. In the microwave region of the
spectrum, the differences are more profound because atmospheric pressure and
water vapor content become more important than for light. For similar reasons, the
properties of microwave propagation differ from lower VHF and HF propagation. In
the HF region, solar ionization of the upper reaches of the atmosphere causes the
kind of effects that lead to long-distance “skip” communications and intercontinental
broadcasting. This chapter examines radio propagation phenomena so that you have
a better understanding of what an antenna is used for and what parameters are important to ensure the propagation results that you desire.

Radio waves
Although today it is well recognized that radio signals travel in a wave-like manner,
that fact was not always so clear. It was well known in the first half of the nineteenth
century that wires carrying electrical currents produced an induction field surrounding the wire, which is capable of causing action over short distances. It was
also known that this induction field is a magnetic field, and that knowledge formed
the basis for electrical motors. In 1887, physicist Heinrich Hertz demonstrated that
radio signals were electromagnetic waves, like light. Like the induction field, the
electromagnetic wave is created by an electrical current moving in a conductor (e.g.,
a wire). Unlike the induction field, however, the radiated field leaves the conductor
and propagates through space as an electromagnetic wave.

Copyright 2001 - the McGraw-Hill Companies

5

Chap02_Carr

4/10/01

1:39 PM

Page 6

6 Radio-wave propagation
The propagation of waves is easily seen in the “water analogy.” Although not
a perfect match to radio waves, it serves to illustrate the point. Figure 2-1 shows a
body of water into which a ball is dropped (Fig. 2-1A). When the ball hits the water
(Fig. 2-1B), it displaces water at its point of impact, and pushes a leading wall of water away from itself. The ball continues to sink and the wave propagates away from
it until the energy is dissipated. Although Fig. 2-1 shows the action in only one dimension (a side view), the actual waves propagate outward in all directions, forming
concentric circles when viewed from above.
The wave produced by a dropped ball is not continuous, but rather is damped
(i.e., it will reduce in amplitude on successive crests until the energy is dissipated
and the wave ceases to exist). But to make the analogy to radio waves more realistic, the wave must exist in a continuous fashion. Figure 2-2 shows how this is done:
a ball is dipped up and down in a rhythmic, or cyclic manner, successively rein-

Falling object
Surface of water

A
Leading wave forms at instant
object strikes water

B
Spray
Leading wave moves radially outward

C
Point of original disturbance

A
B

D

Notes: A Amplitude of leading wave
B Corresponds to 1 cycle of oscillation
2-1 A ball dropped into water generates a wavefront that spreads out from the point of original disturbances.

Chap02_Carr

4/10/01

1:39 PM

Page 7

Radio waves 7
forcing new wave crests on each dip. The waves continue to radiate outward as
long as the ball continues to oscillate up and down. The result is a continuous
wave train.
There are two related properties of all waves that are important to radio waves
as well: frequency (f) and wavelength (λ). The frequency is the number of oscillations (or cycles) per unit of time. In radio waves, the unit of time is the second, so
frequency is an expression of the number of cycles per second (cps). If the period
of time required for the leading wave to travel from point “A” to “B” is one second
(1 s), and there are two complete wave cycles in that space, then the frequency of
the wave created by the oscillating ball is 2 cps.
At one time, radio frequencies (along with the frequencies of other electrical
and acoustical waves) were expressed in cps, but in honor of Heinrich Hertz, the unit
was renamed the hertz (Hz) many years ago. Because the units are equal (1 Hz =
1 cps), the wave in Fig. 2-2 has a frequency of 2 Hz.
Because radio frequencies are so high, the frequency is usually expressed in
kilohertz (kHz—1000s of Hz) and megahertz (MHz—1,000,000s of Hz). Thus, the
frequency of a station operating in the middle of the AM broadcasting band can be
properly expressed as 1,000,000 Hz, or 1000 kHz, or 1 MHz, all of which are equivalent to each other. Radio dials in North America are usually calibrated in kHz or MHz.
In Europe and the rest of the world, on the other hand, it is not uncommon to find
radio dials calibrated in meters, the unit of wavelength, as well as in frequency. In
most equations used in radio antenna design, the proper units are hertz, kilohertz,
and megahertz.

2-2 Bobbing ball on a
string demonstrates
continuous wave
generation action.

1s
A

B



Chap02_Carr

4/10/01

1:39 PM

Page 8

8 Radio-wave propagation
The wavelength of any wave is the distance between like features on the waveform. In the case of Fig. 2-2, the wavelength (λ) is the distance between successive
positive peaks. We could also measure the same distance between successive negative peaks, or between any two similar features on successive waves. In radio work,
the wavelength of the signal is expressed in meters or its subunits.
The wavelength is proportional to the reciprocal of the frequency. The wavelength of any wave is related to the frequency so that fλ = v, where f is the frequency
in Hz, λ is the wavelength in meters, and v is the velocity of propagation in meters
per second (m/s). Because radio waves propagate at the speed of light (which is also
an electromagnetic wave), approximately 300,000,000 m/s in both free space and
the earth’s atmosphere, the lowercase letter c is used to represent velocity (rather
than v), so you can rewrite this expression in the form
c
300,000,000
fHz =  = 
λmeters
λmeters

[2.1]

These equations are sometimes abbreviated for use with the units kHz and MHz:
300,000
FkHz = 
λmeters

[2.2]

300
fMHz = 
λmeters

[2.3]

You can get an idea of the order of length of these waves by solving Eq. 2.3 for
several different frequencies: 100 kHz, 1 MHz (in the AM broadcast band), 10 MHz
(in the shortwave bands), and 1000 MHz (microwave bands). If you work the
equations, then you will find that these wavelengths are 3000 m (100 kHz), 300 m
(1 MHz), 30 m (10 MHz), and 0.3 m, or 30 cm (1000 MHz). You can see from these
numbers why 1 MHz is in what is called the medium-wave band, 10 MHz is in the
short wave band, and 1,000 MHz is in the microwave (“very small” wave) band. At
100 kHz, which is 0.1 MHz, the wavelength is 3000 m, so this frequency is in the longwave band.
The place where the water analogy falls down most profoundly is in the nature of
the medium of propagation. Water waves move by moving water molecules; water
is said to be the medium in which the wave propagates. At one time, scientists could
not conceive of the “action at a distance” provided by radio waves, so they invented
a hypothetical medium called ether (or aether) for propagating electromagnetic
waves (such as radio waves and light). It was not until the late nineteenth century
that American physicists Michaelson and Morley proved that the ether does not exist.
Nonetheless, radio enthusiasts still refer to the “stuff” out of which radio waves arrive
as the “ether.” This terminology is merely an archaic, linguistic echo of the past.

The electromagnetic field: a brief review
A great deal of heavily mathematical material can be presented about electromagnetic waves. Indeed, developing Maxwell’s equations is a complete field of study for

Chap02_Carr

4/10/01

1:39 PM

Page 9

The electromagnetic field: a brief review 9
specialists. In this section, you will not use this rigorous treatment because you can
refer to engineering textbooks for that depth of information. The purpose here is to
present a descriptive approach that is designed to present you with a basic understanding of the phenomena. The approach here is similar to the learning of a “conversational” foreign language, rather than undertaking a deep study of its grammar,
syntax, and context. For those whose professional work routinely involves electromagnetic waves, this treatment is hopelessly simplistic. For that I make no apology,
because it serves a greater audience. The goal here is to make you more comfortable
when thinking about the propagation of electromagnetic fields in the radio portion of
the electromagnetic spectrum.
Radio signals are transverse electromagnetic (TEM or EM) waves exactly like
light, infrared (IR), and ultraviolet (UV), except for frequency. Radio waves have
much lower frequencies than light, IR, or UV, hence they have much longer wavelengths. The TEM (EM) wave consists of two mutually perpendicular oscillating
fields (see Fig. 2-3) traveling together in phase. One of the fields is an electric field
and the other is a magnetic field.

Radio-wave intensity
The radio wave is attenuated (i.e. reduced in apparent power) as it propagates from
the transmitter to the receiver. Although at some very high microwave frequencies,
there is additional path loss as a result of the oxygen and water vapor content of the
air. At other frequencies other losses exist. Radio waves at all frequencies suffer
losses due to the inverse square law. Let’s take a look at that phenomenon.
The electric field vector falls off in direct proportion to the distance traveled.
The E field is measured in terms of volts per meter (V/m), or in the subunits millivolts per meter (mV/m) or microvolts per meter (µV/m). That is, if an E field of

90°

Electric field
Magnetic field

E
B

Dire
of tr ction
avel

2-3 Electromagnetic wave consists of right angle electric and magnetic fields.

Chap02_Carr

4/10/01

1:39 PM

Page 10

10 Radio-wave propagation
10 V/m crosses your body from head to toe, and you are about 2 m tall, then an
electrical voltage is generated of (2 m)×(10 V/m), or 20 V. The reduction of the E
field is linearly related to distance (i.e., if the distance doubles the E-field voltage
vector halves). Thus, a 100 mV/m E field that is measured 1 mi from the transmitter will be 50 mV/m at 2 mi.
The power in any electrical system is related to the voltage by the relationship
E2
P=
R

[2.4]

where
P is the power in watts (W)
R is the resistance in ohms (Ω)
E is the electrical potential in volts (V)
In the case of a radio wave, the R term is replaced with the impedance (Z) of free
space, which is on the order of 377 Ω. If the E field intensity is, for example, 10 V/m,
then the power density of the signal is
(10 V/m)2
P =  = 0.265 W/m2 = 26.5 mW/m2
377 Ω

[2.5]

The power density, measured in watts per square meter (W/m2), or the subunits
(e.g., mW/cm2), falls off according to the square of the distance. This phenomenon is
shown graphically in Fig. 2-4. Here, you can see a lamp emitting a light beam that
falls on a surface (A), at distance L, with a given intensity. At another surface (B),
that is 2L from the source, the same amount of energy is distributed over an area
(B) that is twice as large as area A. Thus, the power density falls off according to
1/d2, where d is the difference in distance. This is called the inverse square law.

Isotropic sources
In dealing with both antenna theory and radio wave propagation, a theoretical
construct called an isotropic source is sometimes used for the sake of comparison, and for simpler arithmetic. You will see the isotropic model several places in
this book. An isotropic source assumes that the radiator (i.e., an “antenna”) is a
very tiny spherical source that radiates energy equally well in all directions. The
radiation pattern is thus a sphere with the isotropic antenna at the center. Because a spherical source is uniform in all directions, and its geometry is easily determined mathematically, the signal intensities at all points can be calculated
from basic geometric principles.
For the isotropic case, you can calculate the average power in the extended
sphere from
Pt
Pav = 2
[2.6]
4πd

Chap02_Carr

4/10/01

1:39 PM

Page 11

The electromagnetic field: a brief review 11

Lamp
A

B

2L

L

2-4 As a wave propagates, it spreads out according to the inverse square law, i.e., the area
of B is 4 times that of A because it is twice as far from the source.

where
Pav is the average power per unit area
Pt is the total power
d is the radius of the sphere in meters (i.e., the distance from the radiator to the
point in question)
The effective aperture (Ae) of the receiving antenna relates to its ability to collect power from the EM wave and deliver it to the load. Although typically smaller
than the surface area in real antennas, for the theoretical isotropic case Ae = λ2/4π.
The power delivered to the load is
PL = Pav Ae

[2.7]

By combining the two previous equations, the power delivered to a load at distance d is given by
Ptλ2
[2.8]
PL = 
(4π)2d2
where
PL is the power to the load
λ is the wavelength (c/F) of the signal
From these expressions, there can then be derived an expression for ordinary
path losses between an isotropic transmitter antenna and a receiver antenna:

 

Pt
LdB = 10 log 
PL

[2.9]

Chap02_Carr

4/10/01

1:39 PM

Page 12

12 Radio-wave propagation
or, by rearranging to account for individual terms:
LdB = [20 log d] + [20 log FMHz ] + k

[2.10]

where
LdB is the path loss in decibels (dB)
d is the path length
FMHz is frequency in megahertz (MHz)
k is a constant that depends on the units of d as follows:
k = 32.4 if d in kilometers
= 36.58 if d in statute miles
= 37.80 if d in nautical miles
= –37.87 if d in feet
= –27.55 if d in meters
The radiated sphere of energy gets ever larger as the wave propagates away from
the isotropic source. If, at a great distance from the center, you take a look at a small
slice of the advancing wavefront you can assume that it is essentially a flat plane, as in
Fig. 2-5. This situation is analogous to the apparent flatness of the prairie, even though
the surface of the earth is nearly spherical. You would be able to “see” the electric and
magnetic field vectors at right angles to each other in the flat plane wavefront.
The polarization of an EM wave is, by definition, the direction of the electric
field. Figure 2-6A shows vertical polarization, because the electric field is vertical
with respect to the earth. If the fields were exchanged (as in Fig. 2-6B), then the EM
wave would be horizontally polarized.
These designations are especially convenient because they also show the type
of antenna used: vertical antennas produce vertically polarized signals, while hori-

2-5 When viewed as a plane, the
fields appear at right angles to
each other.

Chap02_Carr

4/10/01

1:39 PM

Page 13

The electromagnetic field: a brief review 13
Direction of travel

A
Direction of travel

B
2-6 Wave polarization is determined by the direction of the electric field lines of force:
(A) vertical polarized electromagnetic wave; (B) horizontally polarized wave.

zontal antennas produce horizontally polarized signals. At least one text erroneously states that antennas will not pick up signals of the opposite polarity. Such
is not the case, especially in the high-frequency (HF) and lower very highfrequency (VHF) regions. At VHF, ultrahigh frequency (UHF), and microwave frequencies a loss of approximately 20 to 30 dB can be observed due to crosspolarization.
An EM wave travels at the speed of light, designated by the letter c, which is about
300,000,000 m/s (or 186,000 mi/s). To put this velocity in perspective, a radio signal
originating on the sun’s surface would reach earth in about 8 minutes. A terrestrial radio signal can travel around the earth seven times in one second. The velocity of the

Chap02_Carr

4/10/01

1:39 PM

Page 14

14 Radio-wave propagation
wave slows in dense media, but in air the speed is so close to the “free-space” value
of c, that the same figures are used for both air and the near vacuum of outer space in
practical problems. In pure water, which is much denser than air, the speed of radio
signals is about one-ninth that of the free-space speed. This same phenomenon shows
up in practical work in the form of the velocity factor (V) of transmission lines. In
foam dielectric coaxial cable, for example, the value of V is 0.80, which means that the
signal propagates along the line at a speed of 0.80c, or 80 percent of the speed of light.
This coverage of radio propagation considers the EM wave as a very narrow “ray”
or “pencil beam” that does not diverge as it travels. That is, the ray remains the same
width all along its path. This convention makes it easy to use ray tracing diagrams.
Keep in mind, however, that the real situation, even when narrow-beamwidth microwave signals are used, is much more complicated. Real signals, after all, are sloppier than textbook examples: they are neither infinitesimally thin, nor nondivergent.

The earth’s atmosphere
The electromagnetic waves do not need an atmosphere in order to propagate, as
you will undoubtedly realize from the fact that space vehicles can transmit radio
signals back to earth in a near vacuum. But when a radio wave does propagate in the
earth’s atmosphere, it interacts with the atmosphere, and its path of propagation is
altered. A number of factors affect the interaction, but it is possible to break the
atmosphere into several different categories according to their respective effects
on radio signals.
The atmosphere, which consists largely of oxygen (O2) and nitrogen (N) gases,
is broken into three major zones: troposphere, stratosphere, and ionosphere (Fig.
2-7). The boundaries between these regions are not very well defined, and change
both diurnally (over the course of a day) and seasonally.
The troposphere occupies the space between the earth’s surface and an altitude
of 6 to 11 km (4 to 7 mi). The temperature of the air in the troposphere varies with
altitude, becoming considerably lower at greater altitude compared with ground
temperature. For example, a +10°C surface temperature could reduce to –55°C at
the upper edges of the troposphere.
The stratosphere begins at the upper boundary of the troposphere (6 to 11 km),
and extends up to the ionosphere (≈50 km). The stratosphere is called an isothermal region because the temperature in this region is somewhat constant, despite altitude changes.
The ionosphere begins at an altitude of about 50 km (31 mi) and extends up to
approximately 300 km (186 mi). The ionosphere is a region of very thin atmosphere.
Cosmic rays, electromagnetic radiation of various types (including ultraviolet light
from the sun), and atomic particle radiation from space (most of these from the sun
also), have sufficient energy to strip electrons away from the gas molecules of the
atmosphere. These freed electrons are called negative ions, while the O2 and N molecules that lost electrons are called positive ions. Because the density of the air is
so low at those altitudes, the ions can travel long distances before neutralizing each
other by recombining. Radio propagation on some bands varies markedly between
daytime and nighttime because the sun keeps the level of ionization high during

4/10/01

1:39 PM

Page 15

The electromagnetic field: a brief review 15
Height
in kilometers

Height
in
miles

Atomic particles

350

Particle radiation
Barometric
pressure

Cosmic rays
X-rays

200

300

tio

n

Nighttime short-wave
reflection F2 region

ec

250

nc

yn

igh

ttim

er
efl

150

ue

Daytime short-wave
reflection F1 region
0.000001 mm

00

E2 region

100

1,5

00

-3

0,0

M
e
tr teo
ai r
l

kH

Hig

z)

h-f

req

200

ad

io

wa

ve

s(

150

gh

100

-fr

eq

ue

nc

yr

Broadcast-wave
reflection E1 region
z)
kH
0
0
0.001 mm
1,5
Long-wave
00
5
reflection
50
s(
ve
D region
a
w
o
i
ad
Ultraviolet light
Hz)
yr
00 k
c
5
2 mm
20
en
es (
qu
wav
Ozone
layer
fre
o
i
ad
m
cy r
Temperature
diu
uen
q
Stratosphere
e
Me
-fr
–40°C
Low
20
–55°C
Isothermal layer
Troposphere
–80°C
+10°C
Ocean
760 mm
Sea
Sial
level
Hi

Chap02_Carr

50

25
Sea
level

Basaltic layer

2-7 Radio propagation in the ionosphere is affected by a number of different physical factors: cosmic rays,
atomic particles, solar radiation.

Chap02_Carr

4/10/01

1:39 PM

Page 16

16 Radio-wave propagation
daylight hours, but the ionization begins to fall off rapidly after sunset, altering
the radio propagation characteristics after dark. The ionization does not occur at
lower altitudes because the air density is such that the positive and negative ions are
numerous and close together, so recombination occurs rapidly.

EM wave propagation phenomena

av

tw

en

to surface

cid

In

Line perpendicular

Because EM waves are waves, they behave in a wave-like manner. Figure 2-8 illustrates some of the wave behavior phenomena associated with light and radio waves:
reflection, refraction, and diffraction. All three play roles in radio propagation.
Reflection and refraction are shown in Fig. 2-8A. Reflection occurs when a
wave strikes a denser reflective medium, as when a light wave strikes a glass mirror. The incident wave (shown as a single ray) strikes the interface between less
dense and more dense mediums at a certain angle of incidence (ai ), and is reflected at exactly the same angle (now called the angle of reflection (ar ). Because these angles are equal, a reflected radio signal can often be traced back to
its origin.
Refraction occurs when the incident wave enters a region of different density,
and thereby undergoes both a velocity change and a directional change. The amount
and direction of the change are determined by the ratio of the densities between the
two media. If Zone B is much different from Zone A, then bending is great. In radio

ve

ed

ct

fle

Re

e

Less dense
More dense

ai

Zone
A

Ar

2-8A Reflection and refraction
phenomena.
Zone
B

Or

ig

Ref

(Note: ai  Ar)

wa

in

al

t
rac

pa

th

w
ed
ave

Chap02_Carr

4/10/01

1:39 PM

Page 17

EM wave propagation phenomena 17
systems, the two media might be different layers of air with different densities. It is
possible for both reflection and refraction to occur in the same system. Indeed, more
than one form of refraction might be present. These topics will be covered in greater
depth shortly.
Diffraction is shown in Fig. 2-8B. In this case, an advancing wavefront encounters an opaque object (e.g., a steel building). The shadow zone behind the building
is not simply perpendicular to the wave, but takes on a cone shape as waves bend
around the object. The “umbra region” (or diffraction zone) between the shadow
zone (“cone of silence”) and the direct propagation zone is a region of weak (but not
zero) signal strength. In practical situations, signal strength in the cone of silence
rarely reaches zero. A certain amount of reflected signals scattered from other
sources will fill in the shadow a little bit. The degree of diffraction effect seen in any
given case is a function of the wavelength of the signal, the size of the object, and its
electromagnetic properties.

Propagation paths
There are four major propagation paths: surface wave, space wave, tropospheric,
and ionospheric. The ionospheric path is important to medium-wave (MW) and HF
propagation, but is not important to VHF, UHF, or microwave propagation. The space
wave and surface wave are both ground waves, but they behave differently enough
to warrant separate consideration. The surface wave travels in direct contact with
the earth’s surface and it suffers a severe frequency-dependent attenuation caused
by absorption into the ground.
The space wave is also a ground-wave phenomenon, but it is radiated from an
antenna many wavelengths above the surface. No part of the space wave normally
travels in contact with the surface; VHF, UHF, and microwave signals are usually
space waves. There are, however, two components of the space wave in many cases:
direct and reflected (see Fig. 2-9).
The tropospheric wave is lumped with the direct space wave in some texts, but it
has properties that actually make it different in practical situations. The troposphere

2-8B Diffraction phenomena.

Chap02_Carr

4/10/01

1:39 PM

Page 18

18 Radio-wave propagation

Tropospheric path

th

pa

c
eri

h

osp

rop

T

R
MT

RCVR

D1 Direct path space wave

X

D2

rface

's su
Earth

efl
D3 R

e

wav

d pa

ecte

Ht

ace
th sp

R
in efr
to ac
gr te
ou d
nd

2-9 Space wave propagation.

is the region of earth’s atmosphere between the surface and the stratosphere, or
about 4 to 7 mi above the surface. Thus, most forms of ground wave propagate in the
troposphere. But because certain propagation phenomena (caused mostly by
weather conditions) only occur at higher altitudes, tropospheric propagation should
be differentiated from other forms of ground wave.
The ionosphere is the region of earth’s atmosphere that is above the stratosphere. The peculiar feature of the ionosphere is that molecules of air gas (O2 and N)
can be ionized by stripping away electrons under the influence of solar radiation and
certain other sources of energy. In the ionosphere, the air density is so low that ions
can travel relatively long distances before recombining with oppositely charged
ions to form electrically neutral atoms. As a result, the ionosphere remains ionized for
long periods of the day—even after sunset. At lower altitudes, however, air density
is greater and recombination thus occurs rapidly. At those altitudes, solar ionization
diminishes to nearly zero immediately after sunset, or never achieves any significant
levels even at local noon.
Ionization and recombination phenomena in the ionosphere add to the noise
level experienced at VHF, UHF, and microwave frequencies. The properties of
the ionosphere are important to microwave technology because of the noise contribution. In satellite communications, there are some additional transionospheric effects.

Ground-wave propagation
The ground wave, naturally enough, travels along the ground, or at least in close
proximity to it. There are three basic forms of ground wave: space wave, surface

Hr

Chap02_Carr

4/10/01

1:39 PM

Page 19

EM wave propagation phenomena 19
wave, and tropospheric wave. The space wave does not actually touch the ground.
As a result, space wave attenuation with distance in clear weather is about the same
as in free space (except above about 10 GHz, where H2O and O2 absorption increases
dramatically). Of course, above the VHF region, weather conditions add attenuation
not found in outer space.
The surface wave is subject to the same attenuation factors as the space wave,
but in addition it also suffers ground losses. These losses are caused by ohmic resistive losses in the conductive earth. In other words, the signal heats up the
ground. Surface wave attenuation is a function of frequency, and it increases
rapidly as frequency increases. Both of these forms of ground-wave communications are affected by the following factors: wavelength, height of both the receiving and transmitting antennas, distance between the antennas, and the terrain and
weather along the transmission path. Figure 2-10 is a nomograph that can be used
to calculate the line of sight distances in miles from a knowledge of the receiver
and transmitter antenna heights. Similarly, Figs. 2-11A and 2-11B show power attenuation with frequency and distance (Fig. 2-11A) and power attenuation in
terms of field intensity (Fig. 2-11B).
Ground-wave communications also suffer another difficulty, especially at VHF,
UHF, and microwave frequencies. The space wave is like a surface wave, but it is radiated many wavelengths above the surface. It is made up of two components (see
Fig. 2-9 again): the direct and reflected waves. If both of these components arrive at
the receiving antenna, they will add algebraically to either increase or decrease signal strength. There is always a phase shift between the two components because the
two signal paths have different lengths (i.e., D1 is less than D2 + D3). In addition,
there may possibly be a 180° (π radians) phase reversal at the point of reflection
(especially if the incident signal is horizontally polarized), as in Fig. 2-12. The following general rules apply in these situations:
• A phase shift of an odd number of half wavelengths causes the components to
add, increasing signal strength (constructive interference).
• A phase shift of an even number of half wavelengths causes the components to subtract (Fig. 2-12), thus reducing signal strength (destructive
interference).
• Phase shifts other than half wavelength add or subtract according to relative
polarity and amplitude.
You can characterize the loss of signal over path Dl with a parametric term n that
is defined as follows:
Sr
n=
[2.11]
Sf
where
n is the signal loss coefficient
Sr is the signal level at the receiver in the presence of a ground reflection component
Sf is the free-space signal strength over path D1 if no reflection took place.

Chap02_Carr

4/10/01

1:39 PM

Page 20

20 Radio-wave propagation

2-10 Nomograph showing the line-of-sight transmission distance as a function of receiving and transmitting
antenna heights.

Chap02_Carr

4/10/01

1:40 PM

Page 21

EM wave propagation phenomena 21

2-11A Power in a free-space field (normalized to 1 W).

You can calculate as follows:





[2.12]





[2.13]

2πhthr
n2 = 4 sin2 
λD1
or

2πhthr
n = 2 sin 
λD1

The reflected signal contains both amplitude change and phase change. The
phase change is typically π radians (180°). The amplitude change is a function of
frequency and the nature of the reflecting surface. The reflection coefficient can be
characterized as
γ = pe jφ
[2.14]

Chap02_Carr

4/10/01

1:40 PM

Page 22

22 Radio-wave propagation

2-11B Relation of field strength to signal field power.

2-12 Out-of-phase waves cancel.

where
γ is the reflection coefficient
p is the amplitude change
φ is the phase change
j is the imaginary operator (–1
)
For smooth, high-reflectivity surfaces and a horizontally polarized microwave
signal that has a shallow angle of incidence, the value of the reflection coefficient is
close to –1.

Chap02_Carr

4/10/01

1:40 PM

Page 23

EM wave propagation phenomena 23
The phase change of the reflected signal at the receiving antenna is at least π radians because of the reflection. Added to this change is an additional phase shift that
is a function of the difference in path lengths. This phase shift can be expressed in
terms of the two antenna heights and path length.





4πhthr
s=π+ 
λD1

[2.15]

A category of reception problems called multipath phenomena exists because
of interference between the direct and reflected components of the space wave. The
form of multipath phenomena that is, perhaps, most familiar to many readers is
ghosting in off-the-air television reception. Some multipath events are transitory in
nature (as when an aircraft flies through the transmission path), while others are
permanent (as when a large building, or hill, reflects the signal). In mobile communications, multipath phenomena are responsible for reception dead zones and
“picket fencing.” A dead zone exists when destructive interference between direct
and reflected (or multiply reflected) waves drastically reduces signal strengths. This
problem is most often noticed at VHF and above when the vehicle is stopped; and
the solution is to move the antenna one-half wavelength (which at VHF and UHF is
a matter of a few inches). Picket fencing occurs as a mobile unit moves through successive dead zones and signal enhancement (or normal) zones, and it sounds like a
series of short noise bursts.
At VHF, UHF, and microwave frequencies, the space wave is limited to so-called
line-of-sight distances. The horizon is theoretically the limit of communications distance, but the radio horizon is actually about 15 percent farther than the optical horizon (Fig. 2-13). This phenomenon is caused by refractive bending in the atmosphere
around the curvature of the earth, and it makes the geometry of the situation look as
if the earth’s radius is 4⁄3 the actual radius.
The refraction phenomenon occurs at VHF through microwave frequencies, but
not in the visible light spectrum, because water and atmospheric pressure (which relates to the effects of atmospheric gases on microwave signals) become important
contributors to the phenomenon. The K factor expresses the degree of curvature
along any given path, while the index of refraction n measures the differential
properties between adjacent zones of air.
The K factor, also called the effective earth’s radius factor, is defined according
to the relationship of two hypothetical spheres, both centered at the exact center of

2-13 Phenomenon by which
“greater than line of sight”
communications occurs.

Chap02_Carr

4/10/01

1:40 PM

Page 24

24 Radio-wave propagation
the earth. The first sphere is the earth’s surface, which has a radius ro (3440 nmi or
6370 km). The second sphere is larger than the first by the curvature of the signal
“ray path,” and has a radius r. The value of K is approximately
r
K=
ro

[2.16]

A value of K = 1 indicates a straight path (Fig. 2-14); a value of K > 1 indicates
a positively curved path (refraction); and a value of K < 1 indicates a negatively
curved path (subrefraction). The actual value of K varies with local weather conditions, so one can expect variation not only between locations, but also seasonally. In
the arctic regions, K varies approximately over the range 1.2 to 1.34. In the “lower
48” states of the United States, K varies from 1.25 to 1.9 during the summer months
(especially in the south and southeast), and from 1.25 to 1.45 in the winter months.
The index of refraction n can be defined in two ways, depending on the situation.
When a signal passes across boundaries between adjacent regions of distinctly different properties (as occurs in temperature inversions, etc.), the index of refraction
is the ratio of the signal velocities in the two regions. In a homogeneous region n
can be expressed as the ratio of the free-space velocity c to the actual velocity in the
atmosphere V:
c
n=
V

[2.17]

At the surface, near sea level, under standard temperature and pressure conditions, the value of n is approximately 1.0003, and in homogeneous atmospheres it
will decrease by 4 × 10–8 per mile of altitude. The units of n are a bit cumbersome in
equations, so the UHF/microwave communities tend to use a derivative parameter,
N, called the refractivity of the atmosphere:
N = (n – 1) × 106

2-14 Refraction changes path length.

[2.18]

Chap02_Carr

4/10/01

1:40 PM

Page 25

EM wave propagation phenomena 25
The value of N tends to vary from about 280 to 320, and both n and N vary with
altitude. In nonhomogeneous atmospheres (the usual case), these parameters will
vary approximately linearly for several tenths of a kilometer. All but a few microwave
relay systems can assume an approximately linear reduction of n and N with increasing altitude, although airborne radios and radars cannot. There are two methods for calculating N:
77.6
N= 
T


P + 
T

[2.19]

77.6
N=
T



[2.20]



4810esHrel

and
3.73 × 105es

T2



where
P is the atmospheric pressure in millibars (1 torr = 1.3332 mbar)
T is temperature in kelvins
es is saturation vapor pressure of atmospheric water in millibars
Hrel is the relative humidity expressed as a decimal fraction (rather than a
percentage)
Ray path curvature (K) can be expressed as a function of either n or N, provided
that the assumption of a linear gradient dn/dh holds true:
1
K = 
rodn
1 + 
dh





[2.21]

or
1
K = 
dN /dh
1 + 
157





[2.22]

For the near-surface region, where dn/dh varies at about 3.9 × 10–8 m, the value
of K is 1.33. For most terrestrial microwave paths, this value (K = 4⁄3 = 1.33) is called
a standard refraction, and is used in calculations in the absence of additional
data. For regions above the linear zone close to the surface, you can use another expression of refractivity:
Na = Nse e r t
C (h

where
N1 is the refractivity at 1 km altitude
hr is the height of the receiver antenna
ht is the height of the transmit antenna

h)

[2.23]

Chap02_Carr

4/10/01

1:40 PM

Page 26

26 Radio-wave propagation
Ce = Ln(Ns /N1)
Na is the refractivity at altitude
Ns is the refractivity at the earth’s surface
For simple models close to the surface, you can use the geometry shown in
Fig. 2-15. Distance d is a curved path along the surface of the earth. But because
the earth’s radius ro is about 4000 statute miles, and it is thus very much larger than
a practical antenna height h, you can simplify the model in Fig. 2-15A to that in
Fig. 2-15B. The underlying assumption is that the earth has a radio radius equal to
about 4⁄3 (K = 1.33) of the actual physical radius of its surface.
Earth's surface

h

d

ro
ro

ro  4000 mi

2-15A Geometry for calculating radio distances.

h

2-15B Simplified geometry.

d

Chap02_Carr

4/10/01

1:40 PM

Page 27

EM wave propagation phenomena 27
The value of distance d is found from the expression
d = 2
rch
ft

[2.24]

where
d is the distance to the radio horizon in statute miles
ro is the normalized radius of the earth
hft is the antenna height in feet
Accounting for all constant factors, the expression reduces to
d = 1.414 h
ft

[2.25]

all factors being the same as defined above.
Example 2-1 A radio tower has a UHF radio antenna that is mounted 150 feet
above the surface of the earth. Calculate the radio horizon (in statute miles) for this
system.
Solution:
d = 1.414 (ht)t
= (1.414)(150 ft)1/2
= (1.414)(12.25)
= 17.32 mi
For other units of measurement:
dnmi = 1.23 h
ft nmi

[2.26]

dkm = 1.30 h
ft

[2.27]

and
km

Surface-wave communications The surface wave travels in direct contact
with the earth’s surface, and it suffers a severe frequency-dependent attenuation because of absorption by the ground.
The surface wave extends to considerable heights above the ground level, although its intensity drops off rapidly at the upper end. The surface wave is subject
to the same attenuation factors as the space wave, but in addition, it also suffers
ground losses. These losses are caused by ohmic resistive losses in the conductive
earth, and to the dielectric properties of the earth. In other words, the signal heats
up the ground. Horizontally polarized waves are not often used for surface wave
communications because the earth tends to short-circuit the E-field component. On
vertically polarized waves, however, the earth offers electrical resistance to the
E-field and returns currents to following waves (Fig. 2-16). The conductivity of
the soil determines how much energy is returned. Table 2-1 shows the typical conductivity values for several different forms of soil.

Chap02_Carr

4/10/01

1:40 PM

Page 28

28 Radio-wave propagation
Direction of travel

Surface of
earth
Ground currents
2-16 Distortion of vertically polarized electric field by lossy ground resistance.

Table 2-1. Sample soil conductivity values
Type of soil
Salt water
Fresh water
Pastoral hills
Marshy, wooded
Rocky hills
Sandy
Cities

Dielectric
constant

Conductivity
(siemens/meter)

Relative
quality

81
80
14–20
12
12–14
10
3–5

5
0.001
0.03–0.01
0.0075
10
0.002
0.001

Best
Very poor
Very good
Average/poor
Poor
Poor
Very poor

The wavefront of a surface wave is tilted because of the losses in the ground that
tend to retard the wavefront’s bottom (also in Fig. 2-16). The tilt angle is a function
of the frequency, as shown in Table 2-2.

Table 2-2. Tilt angle as a function of frequency
Frequency (kHz)
20
200
2,000
20,000

Tilt angle ratio

Earth/seawater (degrees)

2.07
104
64
25

4.3/2.08
13.4/0.13
32.3/0.5
35/1.38

Surface-wave attenuation is a function of frequency, and increases rapidly as frequency increases. For both forms of the ground wave, reception is affected by these
factors: wavelength, height of both the receiving and transmitting antennas, distance between antennas, and both terrain and weather along the transmission

Chap02_Carr

4/10/01

1:40 PM

Page 29

EM wave propagation phenomena 29
path. In addition, the surface wave is affected by the ground losses in Table 2-1. Because of the ground loss effects, the surface wave is attenuated at a much faster rate
than the inverse square law.
Ground-wave propagation frequency effects The frequency of a radio signal
in large measure determines its surface-wave behavior. In the very low-frequency
(VLF) band (<300 kHz), ground losses are small for vertically polarized signals,
so medium-distance communications (up to several hundred miles) are possible.
In the medium-wave band (300 to 3000 kHz, including the AM broadcast band),
distances of 1000 mi are possible with regularity—especially at night. In the highfrequency (HF) band, ground losses are more considerable, so the surface-wave
distance reduces drastically. It is possible, in the upper end of the HF band (3000
to 30,000 kHz) for surface-wave signals to die out within a few dozen miles. This
phenomenon is often seen in the 15- and 10-m amateur radio bands, as well as the
11-m (27-MHz) Citizen’s Band. Stations only 20 mi apart cannot communicate,
but both can talk to a third station across the continent via ionospheric skip.
Thus, the two stations close together must have a station more than 2000 mi away
relay messages between them.
Tropospheric propagation The troposphere is the portion of the atmosphere
between the surface of the earth and the stratosphere (or about 4 to 7 mi above the
surface). Some older texts group tropospheric propagation with ground-wave propagation, but modern practice requires separate treatment. The older grouping overlooks certain common propagation phenomena that simply don’t happen with space
or surface waves.
Refraction is the mechanism for most tropospheric propagation phenomena.
The dielectric properties of the air, which are set mostly by the moisture content
(Fig. 2-17), are a primary factor in tropospheric refraction. Recall that refraction
occurs in both light or radio-wave systems when the wave passes between mediums
of differing density. Under that situation, the wave path will bend an amount proportional to the difference in density.
Two general situations are typically found—especially at UHF and microwave
frequencies. First, because air density normally decreases with altitude, the top of
a beam of radio waves typically travels slightly faster than the lower portion of the
beam. As a result, those signals refract a small amount. Such propagation provides
slightly longer surface distances than are normally expected from calculating the
distance to the radio horizon. This phenomenon is called simple refraction, and was
discussed in a preceding section.
A special case of refraction called superrefraction occurs in areas of the world
where warmed land air goes out over a cooler sea (Fig. 2-18). Examples of such areas
have deserts that are adjacent to a large body of water: the Gulf of Aden, the southern
Mediterranean, and the Pacific Ocean off the coast of Baja California are examples.
VHF/UHF/microwave communications up to 200 mi are reported in such areas.
The second form of refraction is weather-related. Called ducting, this form
of propagation (Fig. 2-19) is actually a special case of superrefraction. Evaporation of
sea water causes temperature inversion regions to form in the atmosphere—that is,
layered air masses in which the air temperature is greater than in the layers below it.
(Note: air temperature normally decreases with altitude, but at the boundary with an

Chap02_Carr

4/10/01

1:40 PM

Page 30

30 Radio-wave propagation
Low dielectric constant
(low moisture content)
Direction of
propagation

High dielectric constant
(high moisture content)

A

Surface of earth

High dielectric constant

Direction of
propagation

Low dielectric constant

Surface of earth

B

2-17 Refraction in the troposphere.

inversion region, it increases.) The inversion layer forms a “duct” that acts like a
waveguide. In Fig. 2-19, the distance Dl is the normal “radio horizon” distance, and
D2 is the distance over which duct communications can occur.
Ducting allows long-distance communications from lower VHF through microwave frequencies, with 50 MHz being a lower practical limit and 10 GHz being an
ill-defined upper limit. Airborne operators of radio, radar, and other electronic
equipment can sometimes note ducting at even higher microwave frequencies.
Antenna placement is critical for ducting propagation. Both the receiving and
transmitting antennas must be either (1) inside the duct physically (as in airborne
cases) or (2) able to propagate at an angle such that the signal gets trapped inside
the duct. The latter is a function of antenna radiation angle. Distances up to 2500 mi

Chap02_Carr

4/10/01

1:40 PM

Page 31

EM wave propagation phenomena 31
High
temp

Low
temp

Refracted path

Direct path

Hot desert
Cold sea

2-18 Superrefraction phenomena.

Tropospheric wave

Spac

Temper
atu
inversio re
n
zone

e wa

ve

h
Ear

D1
D2

th's

surf

ace

2-19 Ducting phenomenon.

or so are possible through ducting. Certain paths where frequent ducting occurs
have been identified: the Great Lakes to the Atlantic seaboard; Newfoundland to the
Canary Islands; across the Gulf of Mexico from Florida to Texas; Newfoundland to
the Carolinas; California to Hawaii; and Ascension Island to Brazil.
Another condition is noted in the polar regions, where colder air from the land
mass flows out over warmer seas (Fig. 2-20). Called subrefraction, this phenomena
bends EM waves away from the earth’s surface—thereby reducing the radio horizon
by about 30 to 40 percent.

Chap02_Carr

4/10/01

1:40 PM

Page 32

32 Radio-wave propagation
Low
temp

Higher
temp

Direct path

R e fr a cte d p a

th

Cold land mass
Warmer sea

2-20 Subrefraction phenomena.

All tropospheric propagation that depends upon air-mass temperatures and humidity, shows diurnal (i.e., over the course of the day) variation caused by the local
rising and setting of the sun. Distant signals may vary 20 dB in strength over a 24hour period. These tropospheric phenomena explain how TV, FM broadcast, and
other VHF signals can propagate great distances, especially along seacoast paths, at
some times while being weak or nonexistent at others.
Diffraction phenomena Electromagnetic waves diffract when they encounter
a radio-opaque object. The degree of diffraction, and the harm it causes, is frequencyrelated. Above 3 GHz, wavelengths are so small (approximately 10 cm) compared to
object sizes that large attenuation of the signal occurs. In addition, beamwidths
(a function of antenna size compared with wavelength) tend to be small enough
above 3 GHz that blockage of propagation by obstacles is much greater.
Earlier in this chapter, large-scale diffraction around structures (such as buildings) was discussed. The view presented was from above, so it represented the horizontal plane. But there is also a diffraction phenomenon in the vertical plane. Terrain,
or man-made objects, intervening in the path between UHF microwave stations (Fig.
2-21A) cause diffraction, and some signal attenuation. There is a minimum clearance
required to prevent severe attenuation (up to 20 to 30 dB) from diffraction. Calculation of the required clearance comes from Huygens-Fresnel wave theory.
Consider Fig. 2-21B. A wave source A, which might be a transmitter antenna,
transmits a wavefront to a destination C (receiver antenna). At any point along path
A-C, you can look at the wavefront as a partial spherical surface (Bl-B2 ) on which all
wave rays have the same phase. This plane can be called an isophase plane. You can
assume that the dn/dh refraction gradient over the height extent of the wavefront is
small enough to be considered negligible.
Using ray tracing we see rays ra incoming to plane [Bl-B2 ], and rays rb outgoing
from plane [Bl-B2 ]. The signal seen at C is the algebraic sum of all rays rb. The signal
pattern will have the form of an optical interference pattern with wave cancellation
occurring between rb waves that are a half-wavelength apart on [Bl-B2 ]. The ray im-

Chap02_Carr

4/10/01

1:40 PM

Page 33

EM wave propagation phenomena 33

2-21A Terrain masking of VHF and higher-frequency signals.

pact points on plane [Bl-B2 ] form radii Rn called Fresnel zones. The lengths of the
radii are a function of the frequency and the ratio of the distances D1 and D2 (see
Fig. 2-21B). The general expression is

Rn = M

 

D1D2
N
 
FGHz D1 + D2

[2.28]

where
Rm is the radius of the nth Fresnel zone
FGHz is the frequency in GHz
D1 is the distance from the source to plane B1-B2
D2 is the distance from destination to plane B1-B2
N is an integer (1, 2, 3, . . .)
M a constant of proportionality equal to
17.3 if Rm is in meters and D1, D2 are in kilometers and
72.1 if Rm is in feet and D1, D2 are in statute miles
If you first calculate the radius of the critical first Fresnel zone (R1), then you
can calculate the nth Fresnel zone from
Rn = R1n


[2.29]

Example 2-2 Calculate the radius of the first Fresnel zone for a 2.5-GHz signal
at a point that is 12 km from the source and 18 km from the destination.

Chap02_Carr

4/10/01

1:40 PM

Page 34

34 Radio-wave propagation
Isophase
spherical
wave
surface

B1
b

a

b

a
A

S

a

C

b

a

b

a

b

B2
D1

D2

D1  A-S
D  S-C

RN

R

N-

1

S

(Rotated view)
2-21B Fresnel zone geometry.

Solution:

 


R1 = M

D1D2
N
 
FGHz D1 + D2

R1 = (17.3)

 

2.5 
12 + 18 
1

12 × 18

Chap02_Carr

4/10/01

1:40 PM

Page 35

EM wave propagation phenomena 35
Rt = (17.3) (0
.4
)(7
.2
)
R1 = (17.3) (2.88) = 29.4 m
For most terrestrial microwave systems an obstacle clearance of 0.6R1 is required
to prevent diffraction attenuation under most normal conditions. However, there are
conditions in which the clearance zone should be more than one Fresnel zone.
Fading mechanisms Fading is defined as a reduction in amplitude caused by
reduced received signal power, changes in phase or polarization, wave cancellation,
or other related problems that are not caused by a change in the output power level or
other parameters associated with either the transmitter or its antenna system. You
would not ordinarily think that line-of-sight radio relay links would experience
fading, but that is not true. Fading does, in fact, occur, and it can reach levels of 30 dB
in some cases (20 dB is relatively common). In addition, fading phenomena in the
VHF-and-up range can last several hours, with some periods being reported of several days in duration (although very rare). There are several mechanisms of fading,
and these will be dealt with in this section. HF fading caused by ionospheric mechanisms will be covered later.
Any or all of the mechanisms shown in Fig. 2-22 can occur in a given system. In all
cases, two or more signals arrive at the receiver antenna (Rx). Ray A represents the
direct path signal that is, ideally, the only signal to reach the destination. But it is also
possible that a signal, in an elevated layer or other atmospheric anomaly, will cause
refraction or subrefraction of the wave creating a second component, B. If this second
signal arrives out of phase with A, then fading will occur (signal reinforcement—

B

Higher level
layer

A
TX

RX

D
C

C

2-22 Multiple paths for signal to take between transmitter and receiver.

Chap02_Carr

4/10/01

1:40 PM

Page 36

36 Radio-wave propagation
in phase—can also occur). It is also possible to see subrefraction fading, as in D. The
classical multipath situation represented by ray C and its reflected component C' is
also a source of fading.
These mechanisms are frequency-sensitive, so a possible countermeasure is to
use frequency diversity. Hopping over a 5 percent frequency change will help
eliminate fading in many cases. In cases where either system constraints, or local
spectrum usage prevents a 5 percent delta (change), then try for at least 2 or
3 percent.
Over ocean areas or other large bodies of water there is a possibility of encountering fair weather surface ducting as a cause of fading. These ducts form in the mid
latitudes, starting about 2 to 3 km from shore, up to heights of 10 to 20 mi; wind
velocities are found in the 10 to 60 km/h range. The cause of the problem is a combination of power fading, due to the presence of the duct, and surface reflections
(see Fig. 2-23). Power fading alone can occur when there is a superrefractive duct
elevated above the surface. The duct has a tendency to act as a waveguide and focus
the signal (Fig. 2-24). Although the duct shown is superrefractive, it is also possible
to have a subrefractive duct.
Attenuation in weather Microwave communications above about 10 GHz suffer an increasingly severe attenuation because of water vapor and oxygen in the atmosphere. Figure 2-25 shows the standard attenuation in dB/km for microwave
frequencies. Note that there are several strong peaks in an ever-increasing curve. Setting a system frequency in these regions will cause poor communications or will require a combination of more transmit power, better receiver sensitivity, and better
antennas on receiving and transmitting locations. The curves shown in Fig. 2-25
assume certain standardizing conditions. Rain and other weather conditions can
severely increase the attenuation of signals. In addition to attenuation, radar exhibits
severe clutter problems when signals backscatter from rain cells.

RX

TX

A
B

2-23 Multihop interference.

Chap02_Carr

4/10/01

1:40 PM

Page 37

EM wave propagation phenomena 37

TX

RX

2-24 Wave interference.

Ionospheric propagation
Now let’s turn your attention to the phenomenon of skip communications. Ionospheric propagation is responsible for the ability to do intercontinental broadcasting
and communications. Long-distance radio transmission is carried out on the highfrequency (HF) bands (3 to 30 MHz), also called the shortwave bands. These frequencies are used because of the phenomenon called skip. Under this type of propagation, the earth’s ionosphere acts as though it is a “radio mirror.” Although the
actual phenomenon is based on refraction (not reflection, as is frequently believed),
the appearance to the casual observer is that shortwave and low-VHF radio signals
are reflected from the ionosphere. The actual situation is a little different.
The key lies in the fact that this radio mirror is produced by ionization of the upper
atmosphere. The upper portion of the atmosphere is called the ionosphere because it
tends to be easily ionized by solar and cosmic radiation phenomena. The reason for the
ease with which that region (30 to 300 mi above the surface) ionizes, is that the air density is very low. Energy from the sun strips away electrons from the outer shells of oxygen and nitrogen molecules. The electrons become negative ions, while the remaining
portion of the atom forms positive ions. Because the air is so rarified at those altitudes,
those ions can travel great distances before recombining to form electrically neutral
atoms again. As a result, the average ionization level remains high in that region.
Several sources of energy will cause ionization of the upper atomosphere. Cosmic radiation from outer space causes some degree of ionization, but the majority of
ionization is caused by solar energy.
The role of cosmic radiation was noticed during World War II, when British radar
operators discovered that the distance at which their equipment could detect German aircraft was dependent upon whether or not the Milky Way was above the horizon. Intergalactic radiation raised the background microwave noise level, thereby
adversely affecting the signal-to-noise ratio.

Chap02_Carr

4/10/01

1:40 PM

Page 38

38 Radio-wave propagation

H2O

40
30
20

63 GHz
peak
O2

10

Attenuation (dB/km)

1

22 GHz
peak
H2O

0.1

O2
0.03
0.02

0.01
O2
0.005
0.004
0.003
0.002
H2O
0.001
1

2

3 4 5

10
20 30 40 50
Frequency (GHz)

100

200 300

2-25 Atmospheric absorption of radio signals at microwave frequencies.

Chap02_Carr

4/10/01

1:40 PM

Page 39

EM wave propagation phenomena 39
Events on the surface of the sun sometimes cause the radio mirror to seem to be
almost perfect, and this situation makes spectacular propagation possible. At other
times, however, solar disturbances (Fig. 2-26A) disrupt radio communications for
days at a time.
There are two principal forms of solar energy that affect shortwave communications: electromagnetic radiation and charged solar particles. Most of the radiation is above the visible spectrum, in the ultraviolet and x-ray/gamma-ray region of
the spectrum. Because electromagnetic radiation travels at the speed of light, solar
events that release radiation cause changes to the ionosphere about 8 minutes later.
Charged particles, on the other hand, having a finite mass must travel at a considerably slower velocity. They require two or three days to reach earth.
Various sources of both radiation and particles exist on the sun. Solar flares can
release huge amounts of both radiation and particles. These events are unpredictable and sporadic. Solar radiation also varies over an approximately 27-day period, which is the rotational period of the sun. The same source of radiation will face
the earth once every 27 days, and so events tend to be somewhat repetitive.
Solar and galactic noise affect the reception of weak signals. Solar noise can also
affect radio propagation and act as a harbinger of changes in propagation patterns.
Solar noise can be demonstrated by using an ordinary radio receiver and a directional antenna, preferably operating in the VHF/UHF regions of the spectrum (150 to
152 MHz frequently is used). Aim the antenna at the sun on the horizon at either
sunset or sunrise. A dramatic change in background noise will be noted as the sun
slides across the horizon.

2-26A Solar event that can affect radio propagation on earth.

Chap02_Carr

4/10/01

1:41 PM

Page 40

40 Radio-wave propagation
Sunspots A principal source of solar radiation, especially the periodic forms, is
sunspots (Fig. 2-26B). Sunspots can be as large as 70,000 to 80,000 miles in diameter, and generally occur in clusters. The number of sunspots varies over a period of
approximately 11 years, although the actual periods since 1750 (when records were
first kept) have varied from 9 to 14 years. The sunspot number is reported daily as
the statistically massaged Zurich Smoothed Sunspot Number, or Wolf Number.
The number of sunspots greatly affects radio propagation via the ionosphere. The
low was in the range of 60 (in 1907), and the high was about 200 (1958).
Another indicator of ionospheric propagation potential is the solar flux index
(SFI). This measure is taken in the microwave region (wavelength of 10.2 cm, or
2.8 GHz), at 1700 UTC at Ottawa, Canada. The SFI is reported by the National Institute for Standards and Technology (NIST) radio stations WWV (Fort Collins, CO)
and WWVH (Maui, Hawaii).
The ionosphere offers different properties that affect radio propagation at different times. Variations occur not only over the 11 year sunspot cycle, but also diurnally and seasonally. Obviously, if the sun affects propagation in a significant way,
then differences between nighttime and daytime, and between summer and winter,
must cause variations in the propagation phenomena observed.
The ionosphere is divided, for purposes of radio propagation studies, into various
layers that have somewhat different properties. These layers are only well defined

2-26B Sunspots.

Chap02_Carr

4/10/01

1:41 PM

Page 41

EM wave propagation phenomena 41
in textbooks. However, even there you find a variation in the precise altitudes of the
layers above the earth’s surface. In addition, the real physical situation is such that layers don’t have sharply defined boundaries, but rather fade one into another instead.
Thus, the division into layers is somewhat arbitrary. These layers (Fig. 2-27) are designated D, E, and F (with F being further subdivided into F1 and F2 sublayers).
D layer The D layer is the lowest layer in the ionosphere, and exists from
approximately 30 to 50 mi above the surface. This layer is not ionized as much as the
higher layers, because all forms of solar energy that cause ionization are severely
attenuated by the higher layers above the D layer. The reason for this is that the
D layer is much more dense than the E and F layers, and that density of air molecules
allows ions to recombine to form electroneutral atoms very quickly.
The extent of D layer ionization is proportional to the elevation of the sun, so it
will achieve maximum intensity at midday. The D layer exists mostly during the
warmer months of the year because of both the greater height of the sun above
the horizon and the longer hours of daylight. The D layer almost completely disappears after local sunset. Some observers have reported sporadic incidents of D layer
activity for a considerable time past sunset. The D layer exhibits a large amount of
absorption of medium-wave and shortwave signals (to such an extent that signals
below 4 to 6 MHz are completely absorbed by the D layer).
E layer The E layer exists from approximately 50 to 70 mi above the earth’s
surface, and it is considered the lowest region of the ionosphere that is important to
radio communications. Like the D layer, this region is ionized only during the daylight hours, with ionization levels peaking at midday. The ionization level drops off
sharply in the late afternoon, and almost completely disappears after local sunset.
During most of the year, the E layer is absorptive and it will not reflect radio
signals. During the summer months, however, E layer propagation does occur. A
phenomenon called “short skip” (i.e., less than 100 mi for medium wave and 1000 mi
for shortwave signals) occurs in the E layer during the summer months, and in equatorial regions at other times.
A propagation phenomenon associated with the E layer is called sporadic E
propagation. This phenomenon is caused by scattered zones of intense ionization
in the E layer region of the ionosphere. The sporadic E phenomenon varies seasonally, and it is believed to be caused by the bombardment of solar particles. Sporadic E propagation affects the upper HF and lower VHF region. It is observed
most frequently in the lower VHF spectrum (50 to 150 MHz), but it is also sometimes observed at higher frequencies. The VHF bands occasionally experience
sporadic E propagation. Skip distances on VHF can reach 500 to 1500 miles on one
hop—especially in the lower VHF region (including the 6-m band).
F layer The F layer of the ionosphere is the region that is the principal cause of
long-distance shortwave communications. This layer is located from about 100 to
300 mi above the earth’s surface. Unlike the lower layers, the air density in the
F layer is low enough that ionization levels remain high all day, and decay slowly after local sunset. Minimum levels are reached just prior to local sunrise. Propagation
in the F layer is capable of skip distances up to 2500 mi on a single hop. During the
day there are actually two identifiable and distinct sublayers in the F layer region,
and these are designated the Fl and F2 layers. The F1 layer is found approximately

Chap02_Carr

4/10/01

1:41 PM

Page 42

42 Radio-wave propagation
300 mi

F2
150 mi
F layer

F1
100 mi

70 mi

E
50 mi

D

30 mi

4–7 mi
Troposphere
Earth's surface

2-27 Classification of the earth’s atmosphere for radio propagation.

Chap02_Carr

4/10/01

1:41 PM

Page 43

EM wave propagation phenomena 43
100 to 150 miles above the earth’s surface, and the F2 layer is above the F1 extending up to the 270- to 300-mi limit. Beginning at local sundown, however, the lower
regions of the F1 layer begin to deionize because of recombination of positive and
negative ions. At some time after local sunset, the F1 and F2 layers have effectively
merged to become a single reduced layer beginning at about 175 mi.
The height and degree of ionization of the F2 layer varies over the course of the
day, with the season of the year, and with the 27-day sunspot cycle. The F2 layer begins to form shortly after local sunrise and reaches maximum shortly before noon.
During the afternoon, the F2 layer ionization begins to decay in an exponential manner until, for purposes of radio propagation, it disappears sometime after local sunset. There is some evidence that ionization in the F layer does not completely
disappear, but its importance to HF radio communication does disappear.

Measures of ionospheric propagation
There are several different measures by which the ionosphere is characterized at
any given time. These measures are used in making predictions of radio activity and
long-distance propagation.
The critical frequency and maximum usable frequency (MUF) are indices
that tell us something of the state of ionization and communications ability. These
frequencies increase rapidly after sunrise and international communications usually
begin within 30 minutes.
Critical frequency Fc The critical frequency, designated by Fc, is the highest
frequency that can be reflected when a signal strikes the ionosphere as a vertical
(90° with respect to the surface) incident wave. The critical frequency is determined
from an ionogram, which is a cathode-ray tube (CRT) oscilloscope display of the
height of the ionosphere as a function of frequency. The ionogram is made by firing
a pulse vertically (Fig. 2-28) at the ionosphere from the transmitting station. The
critical frequency is that frequency that is just suffficient to be reflected back to the
transmitter site. Values of Fc can be as low as 3 MHz during the nighttime hours, and
as high as 10 to 15 MHz during the day.
Virtual height Radio waves are refracted in the ionosphere, and those above a
certain critical frequency are refracted so much that they return to earth. Such
waves appear to have been reflected from an invisible radio “mirror.” An observer on
the earth’s surface could easily assume the existence of such a mirror by noting the
return of the “reflected” signal. The height of this apparent “mirror” is called the virtual height of the ionosphere. Figure 2-29 shows the refraction phenomenon by
which a radio wave is bent sufficiently to return to earth. Virtual height is determined by measuring the time interval required for an ionosonde pulse (similar to
that used to measure critical frequency) to travel between the transmitting station
and a receiving station (Fig. 2-30). A radio signal travels at a velocity of 300,000,000
m/s (the speed of light). By observing the time between transmitting the pulse and
receiving it, you can calculate the virtual height of the ionosphere.
Maximum usable frequency (MUF) The maximum usable frequency is the
highest frequency at which communications can take place via the ionosphere over a
given path. The MUF between a fixed transmitter site and two different, widely separated, receivers need not be the same. Generally, however, the MUF is approximately

Chap02_Carr

4/10/01

1:41 PM

Page 44

44 Radio-wave propagation

Layer 2

Ionospheric layers

Layer 1

c = speed of light
t = time (seconds)

Waves at
critical
frequencies

Waves above
critical
frequency
(no reflection
back to
surface)

Hmeters = 1/2 ct
Earth

2-28 Finding critical height of the ionosphere.
C'

Lower edge of the
ionosphere

B

C

HV

A

D

2-29 Finding virtual height of the ionosphere.

Chap02_Carr

4/10/01

1:41 PM

Page 45

EM wave propagation phenomena 45

Ionosphere

Signal
refracts

T  time for round trip

Virtual
height
(H)

3  108 m/s  T
H
2

h's
Eart

ce

surfa

Transmitter

2-30 Finding virtual height of ionosphere.

3 times higher than the critical frequency. Both the MUF and the critical frequency vary
geographically, and they become higher at latitudes close to the equator.
It is a general rule that the best propagation occurs at frequencies just below the
MUF. In fact, there is a so-called frequency of optimum traffic (FOT) that is approximately 85 percent of the MUF. Both noise levels and signal strengths are improved at frequencies near the FOT.
Lowest usable frequency (LUF) At certain low frequencies, the combination
of ionospheric absorption, atmospheric noise, miscellaneous static, and/or receiver
signal-to-noise ratio requirements conspire to reduce radio communications. The
lowest frequency that can be used for communications, despite these factors, is the
lowest usable frequency.
Unlike the MUF, the LUF is not totally dependent on atmospheric physics. The
LUF of a system can be varied by controlling the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). Although
certain factors that contribute to SNR are beyond our control, the effective radiated
power (ERP) of the transmitter can be changed; a 2-MHz decrease in LUF is available
for every 10-dB increase in the ERP of the transmitter.

Ionospheric variation and disturbances
The ionosphere is an extremely dynamic region of the atmosphere, especially from a
radio operator’s point of view, because it significantly alters radio propagation. The

Chap02_Carr

4/10/01

1:41 PM

Page 46

46 Radio-wave propagation
dynamics of the ionosphere are conveniently divided into two general classes: regular
variation and disturbances. This section covers both types of ionospheric change.
Ionospheric variation There are several different forms of variation seen on a
regular basis in the ionosphere: diurnal, 27-day (monthly), seasonal, and 11-year
cycles.
Diurnal (daily) variation The sun rises and falls on a 24-hour cycle, and because it is the principal source of iononization of the upper atmosphere, you can expect diurnal variation. During daylight hours the E and D levels exist, but these
disappear at night. The height of the F2 layer increases until midday, and then it decreases until evening, when it disappears or merges with other layers. As a result of
higher absorption in the E and D layers, lower frequencies are not useful during daylight hours. On the other hand, the F layers reflect higher frequencies during the
day. In the 1- to 30-MHz region, the higher frequencies (>11 MHz) are used during
daylight hours, and the lower frequencies (<11 MHz) at night.
27-day cycle Approximately monthly, this variation is caused by the rotational
period of the sun. Sunspots are localized on the surface of the sun, so they will face
the earth only during a portion of the month. As new sunspots are formed, they do
not show up on the earthside face until their region of the sun rotates earthside.
Seasonal cycle The earth’s tilt varies the exposure of the planet to the sun on
a seasonal basis. In addition, the earth’s yearly orbit is not circular; it is elliptical. As
a result, the intensity of the sun’s energy that ionizes the upper atmosphere varies
with the seasons of the year. In general, the E, D, and F layers are affected—
although the F2 layer is only minimally affected. Ion density in the F2 layer tends to
be highest in winter, and less in summer. During the summer, the distinction between
F1 and F2 layers is less obvious.
11-year cycle The number of sunspots, statistically averaged, varies on an approximately 11-year cycle. As a result, the ionospheric effects that affect radio propagation also vary on an 11-year cycle. Radio propagation, in the shortwave bands, is
best when the average number of sunspots is at its highest.
Disturbances Disturbances in the ionosphere can have a profound effect on
radio communications—and most of them (but not all) are bad. This section will
briefly examine some of the more common forms.
Sporadic E layer A reflective cloud of ionization sometimes appears in the
E layer of the ionosphere; this layer is sometimes called the Es layer. It is believed
that the Es layer forms from the effects of wind shear between masses of air moving
in opposite directions. This action appears to redistribute ions into a thin layer that
is radio-reflective.
Sporadic E propagation is normally thought of as a VHF phenomenon, with most
activity between 30 and 100 MHz, and decreasing activity up to about 200 MHz. However, about 25 to 50 percent of the time, sporadic E propagation is possible on frequencies down to 10 or 15 MHz. Reception over paths of 1400 to 2600 mi are possible
in the 50-MHz region when sporadic E is present. In the northern hemisphere, the
months of June and July are the most prevalent sporadic E months. On most days
when sporadic E is present, it lasts only a few hours.
Sudden ionospheric disturbances (SIDs) The SID, or Dellinger fade, mechanism occurs suddenly, and rarely gives any warning. The SID can last from a few
minutes to many hours. It is known that SIDs often occur in correlation with solar

Chap02_Carr

4/10/01

1:41 PM

Page 47

EM wave propagation phenomena 47
flares, or “bright solar eruptions,” that produce an immense amount of ultraviolet radiation that impinges the upper atmosphere. The SID causes a tremendous increase
in D layer ionization, which accounts for the radio propagation effects. The ionization
is so intense that all receiver operators on the sunny side of the earth experience profound loss of signal strength above about 3 MHz. It is not uncommon for receiver owners to think their receivers are malfunctioning when this occurs. The sudden loss of
signals on sunny side receivers is called Dellinger fade. The SID is often accompanied by variations in terrestrial electrical currents and magnetism levels.
Ionospheric storms The ionospheric storm appears to be produced by an
abnormally large rain of atomic particles in the upper atmosphere, and is often preceded by SIDs 18 to 24 hours earlier. These storms tend to last from several hours,
to a week or more, and are often preceded by two days or so by an abnormally large
collection of sunspots crossing the solar disk. They occur, most frequently, and with
greatest severity, in the higher latitudes, decreasing toward the equator. When the
ionospheric storm commences, shortwave radio signals may begin to flutter rapidly
and then drop out altogether. The upper ionosphere becomes chaotic; turbulence increases and the normal stratification into layers, or zones, diminishes.
Radio propagation may come and go over the course of the storm, but it is
mostly dead. The ionospheric storm, unlike the SID, which affects the sunny side of
the earth, is worldwide. It is noted that the MUF and critical frequency tend to reduce rapidly as the storm commences.
An ionospheric disturbance observed in November 1960 was preceded by about 30
minutes of extremely good, but abnormal, propagation. At 1500 hours EST, European
stations were noted with S9+ signal strengths in the 7000- to 7300-kHz region of the
spectrum, which is an extremely rare occurrence. After about 30 minutes,
the bottom dropped out and even AM broadcast band skip (later that evening) was
nonexistent. At the time, the National Bureau of Standards* radio station, WWV,
was broadcasting a “W2” propagation prediction at 19 and 49 minutes after each hour
(which is terrible!). It was difficult to hear even the 5-MHz WWV frequency in the early
hours of the disturbance, and it disappeared altogether for the next 48 hours. This signal’s fade-out occurred during the weekend of the annual ARRL “Sweepstakes” contest.

Ionospheric sky-wave propagation
Sky-wave propagation occurs because signals in the ionosphere are refracted so
much that they are bent back toward the earth’s surface. To observers on the surface, it looks like the signal was reflected from a radio mirror at the virtual height of
the ionosphere. The skip distance is the surface distance between the transmitter
point (A in Fig. 2-31) and the point where it returns to earth (point C in Fig. 2-31).
The ground-wave zone is the distance from the transmitter site (A in Fig. 2-31) to
where the ground wave fades to a low level, below usefulness (point B in Fig. 2-31).
The skip zone is the distance from the outer edge of the ground-wave zone to the
skip distance, or the distance from B to C in Fig. 2-31.
It is possible for the sky wave and the ground wave to interfere with each
other at some frequencies, under some circumstances. When this happens, the
sky wave has a relative phase that depends on its path length (among other
* Now the National Institute of Standards and Technology.

Chap02_Carr

4/10/01

1:41 PM

Page 48

48 Radio-wave propagation
Ionosphere
Sky wave not
effective

Sky wave
Ground-wave zone

B

Skip zone

Skip distance

A

C

2-31 Relationship between ground wave and different cases of sky wave.

things), so it will arrive at some seemingly random phase relative to the ground
wave. Thus, the sky wave can selectively strengthen or cancel the ground wave,
giving rise to a type of fading.
Incident angle One of the factors that affects the length of the skip distance is
the incident angle of the radio wave. This angle is partially a function of the frequency, and partially a function of the natural radiation angle of the antenna (αr).
The frequency effects are seen as a function of the ionization level and how much a
given frequency is refracted.
The antenna radiation angle is the angle of the main vertical lobe with respect to
the earth’s surface; it is partially a function of its design, and partially of its installation configuration. For example, a 5⁄8-wavelength vertical antenna tends to have a
lower angle of radiation than a 1⁄4-wave vertical antenna. Similarly, the dipole’s angle
of radiation is a function of its height above ground.
Figure 2-32 shows how the angle of radiation affects skip distance. Low-angle-ofradiation signals tend to travel farther with respect to the earth’s surface before refracting, so they produce the longest skip distances. Higher angles of radiation have
shorter skip distances because they tend to return to earth more rapidly. In summertime, some high-frequency bands (e.g,. the 11-m—27 MHz—Citizens Band) offer highangle “short skip” during the summer, and longer skip during the other months. At
higher angles of radiation, there will be a critical angle wave and escape angle waves
that are not returned to earth. These waves are not used for terrestrial communications or broadcasting. Figure 2-33 shows the difference between single-hop skip and
multihop skip, as a function of incident angle. It is generally true that a multihop transmission is more subject to fading, and is weaker, than a single-hop transmission.

Using the ionosphere
The refraction of high-frequency and some medium-wave radio signals back to earth
via the ionosphere gives rise to intercontinental HF radio communications. This phenomenon becomes possible during daylight hours and for a while after sunset when
the ionosphere is ionized. Figure 2-34 reiterates the mechanism of long-distance
skip communications. The transmitter is located at point T, while receiving stations

1:41 PM

Page 49

e

EM wave propagation phenomena 49

pe
wa
v

4/10/01

Es
ca

Chap02_Carr

Critical angle wave
Hi

gh

an

gl

e

Lo

w

an

gle

wa

ve

wa

ve

r

2-32 Sky-wave propagation as a function of antenna radiation angle.

Ionosphere

Single-hop
transmission

Two-hop
transmission

Transmitter

Receiver

2-33 Single-skip and multihop-skip communications.

are located at sites R1 and R2. Signals 1 and 2 are not refracted sufficiently to be refracted back to earth, so they are lost in space. Signal 3, however, is refracted enough
to return to earth, so it is heard at station Rl. The skip distance for signal 3 is the distance from T to R1. At points between T and R1, signal 3 is inaudible, except within
ground-wave distance of the transmitter site (T). This is the reason why two stations
40 mi apart hear each other only weakly, or not at all, while both stations can communicate with a third station 2000 mi away. In amateur radio circles, it is common for
South American stations to relay between two U.S. stations only a few miles apart.
For an example of this problem, listen to the Inter-American and Halo Missionary

Chap02_Carr

4/10/01

1:41 PM

Page 50

Sig
na
l1

50 Radio-wave propagation

l2

na

Sig

nal

4

Sig

Sig

na
l3

Ionosphere

Single-hop
transmission

R1

Two-hop
transmission
R2

T

Receiver

Transmitter
2-34 Effects of radiation angle on distance.

Nets on 21.290 MHz (15 m) daily from about 1700Z to 2100Z (ending time dependent upon traffic).
Multihop skip is responsible for the reception of the signal from transmitter T at
site R3. The signal reflects (not refracts) from the surface at R1, and is retransmitted
into the ionosphere, where it is again refracted back to earth.
Figure 2-35 shows a situation where skip signals are received at different distances depending upon the angle of radiation of the transmitting antenna. A high
angle of radiation causes a shorter skip zone, but a lower angle of radiation results in
a longer skip zone. Communication between any particular locations on any given
frequency requires adjustment of the antenna radiation angle. Some international
shortwave stations have multiple antennas with different radiation angles to ensure
that the correct skip distances are available.
Great circle paths A qreat circle is a line between two points on the surface of a
sphere, such that it lays on a plane through the earth’s center and includes the two
points. When translated to “radiospeak,” a great circle is the shortest path on the surface of the earth between two points. Navigators and radio operators use the great circle for similar, but different, reasons. The navigator’s reason is in order to get from here
to there, and the radio operator’s is to get a transmission path from here to there.
The heading of a directional antenna is normally aimed at the receiving station
along its great circle path. Unfortunately, many people do not understand the concept well enough, for they typically aim the antenna in the wrong direction. For example, I live near Washington, D.C., which is on approximately the same latitude as
Lisbon, Portugal. If I catch a lift on Superman’s back, and he flies due East, we’ll have
dinner in Lisbon, right? Wrong. If you head due east from Washington, DC, across the
Atlantic, the first landfall would be west Africa, somewhere near Zaire or Angola.
Why? Because the great circle bearing 90° takes us far south. The geometry of
spheres, not flat planes, governs the case.

Chap02_Carr

4/10/01

1:41 PM

Page 51

EM wave propagation phenomena 51

Ionosphere

A1 > A2, so
D1 < D2

A1

T

A2

Earth
D1
D2

2-35 Skip propagation.

Figure 2-36 shows a great circle map centered on the Washington, D.C. area.
These maps, or computer tabulations of the same data, can often be purchased for
your own location by supplying your latitude and longitude to the service company
that does the job. By drawing a line from your location at the center of the chart to
the area you want to hear, and then extending it to the edge of the chart, you will
obtain the beam heading required.
Long path versus short path The earth is a sphere (or more precisely, an
oblate spheroid), so from any given point to any other point there are two great circle paths: the long path (major arc) and the short path (minor arc). In general, the
best reception occurs along the short path. In addition, short-path propagation is
more nearly “textbook,” compared with long path reception. However, there are
times when long path is better, or is the only path that will deliver a signal to a specific location from the geographic location in question.
Gray line propagation The gray line is the twilight zone between the nighttime
and daytime halves of the earth. This zone is also called the planetary terminator
(Fig. 2-37). It varies up to +23° either side of the north-south longitudinal lines, depending on the season of the year (it runs directly north-south only at the vernal and
autumnal equinoxes). The D layer of the ionosphere absorbs signals in the HF region.
This layer disappears almost completely at night, but it builds up during the day. Along
the gray line, the D layer is rapidly decaying west of the line, and has not quite built up
east of the line.
Brief periods of abnormal propagation occur along the gray line. Stations on either side of the line can be heard from regions, and at distances, that would otherwise be impossible on any given frequency. For this reason, radio operators often
prefer to listen at dawn and dusk for this effect.

Scatter propagation modes
Ionospheric scatter propagation occurs when clouds of ions exist in the atmosphere. These clouds can exist in both the ionosphere and the troposphere, although

Chap02_Carr

4/10/01

1:41 PM

Page 52

52 Radio-wave propagation

2-36 Azimuthal map centered on Washington, D.C. (Courtesy of The ARRL Antenna Book.)

the tropospheric model is more reliable for communications. Figure 2-38 shows the
mechanism for scatter propagation. Radio signals from the transmitter are reflected
from the cloud of ions to a receiver location that otherwise might not receive it. Scatter propagation occurs mostly in the VHF region, and it allows communications over
extended paths that are not normally available.
There are at least three different modes of scatter from ionized clouds: backscatter, side scatter, and forward scatter. The backscatter mode is a bit like radar, in that
the signal is returned back to the transmitter site, or to regions close to the transmitter.
Forward scatter occurs when the reflected signal continues in the same azimuthal direction (with respect to the transmitter), but is redirected toward the earth’s surface.
Side scatter is similar to forward scatter, but the azimuthal direction might change.
Unfortunately, there are often multiple reflections from the ionized cloud, and
these are shown as “multiple scatter” in Fig. 2-38. When these reflections are able to

Chap02_Carr

4/10/01

1:41 PM

Page 53

EM wave propagation phenomena 53

2-37 The planetary terminator (“gray line”) provides some unusual propagation effects. (Courtesy of MFJ Enterprises.)

Higher layer

Multiple scatter
Scattering
cloud
Backscatter

Side
scatter
Forward
scatter

Transmitting
antenna

Receiving
antenna

2-38 Various modes of scatter propagation.

Chap02_Carr

4/10/01

1:41 PM

Page 54

54 Radio-wave propagation
reach the receiving site, the result is a rapid, fluttery fading that can be of quite profound depths.

Auroral propagation
The auroral effect produces a luminescence in the upper atmosphere resulting from
bursts of particles released from the sun 18 to 48 hours earlier. The light emitted is
called the northern lights and the southern lights. The ionized regions of the atmosphere that create the lights form a radio reflection shield, especially at VHF and
above, although 15 to 20 MHz effects are known. Auroral propagation effects are
normally seen in the higher latitudes, although listeners in the southern tier of states
in the United States are often treated to the reception of signals from the north being reflected from auroral clouds.

Meteor scatter propagation
When meteors enter the earth’s atmosphere, they do more than simply heat up to
the point of burning. The burning meteor leaves a wide, but very short duration,
transient cloud of ionized particles in its path. These ions act as a radio mirror that
permits short bursts of reception between sites correctly situated. Meteor scatter reception is not terribly reliable, although at least two companies offer meteor scatter
communications services for users in the higher latitudes.

Other propagation anomalies
The ionosphere is a physically complex place, and even the extensive coverage in
this chapter is not sufficient to do it justice. Indeed, entire books are available on the
subject, and it is a valid engineering subspecialty. It is therefore not surprising that a
number of propagation anomalies are known.
Nonreciprocal direction If you listen to an amateur band receiver on the East
Coast of the United States, you will sometimes hear European stations—especially
in the late afternoon. But when you try to work those stations there is no reply whatsoever. They simply don’t hear you! This propagation anomaly causes the radio wave
to travel different paths dependent on which direction it travels; i.e., an east→west
signal is not necessarily the reciprocal of a west→east signal. This anomaly can occur
when a radio signal travels through a heavily ionized medium in the presence of a
magnetic field, which is exactly the situation when the signal travels through the
ionosphere in the presence of the earth’s magnetic field.
Another anomaly seen in the radio literature of the 1930s is the Radio Luxembourg effect. It is named after the radio station where it was first noticed. In a
nonlinear ionosphere, it is sometimes noted that the modulation of superpower
(i.e., > 500,000 W) shortwave broadcasters will be transferred to the carrier of a
weaker signal in the same or nearby band. The interchange noted in the 1930s
when this phenomenon was first discovered was between Radio Luxembourg and
Britain’s British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) overseas outlets.

Chap02_Carr

4/10/01

1:41 PM

Page 55

EM wave propagation phenomena 55

Propagation predictions
Propagation predictions for the VLF through low VHF bands are published each
month in several magazines. Ham radio operators often use those in QST magazine
(Fig. 2-39), while SWLs and others tend to prefer those published in magazines such
as Monitoring Times. These charts relate the time of day in Universal Coordinated
Time (UTC, formerly, GMT) and the frequency for transmission to different parts of
the world.

Fading
Skip communications are not without problems. One phenomenon is fading (i.e., a
variation in signal strength as perceived at the receiver site). This problem can
sometimes be overcome by using one of several diversity reception systems. Three
forms of diversity technique are used: frequency diversity, spatial diversity, and
polarity diversity.
In the frequency diversity system (Fig. 2-40), the transmitter will send out two
or more frequencies simultaneously with the same modulating information. Because
the two frequencies will fade differentially, one will always be strong.
The spatial diversity system (Fig. 2-41) assumes that a single transmitter frequency is used. At the receiving site, two or more receiving antennas are used,
spaced one-half wavelength apart. The theory is that the signal will fade at one antenna while it increases at the other. A three-antenna system is often used. Three
separate, but identical, receivers, often tuned by the same master local oscillator, are
connected to the three antennas. Audio mixing, based on the strongest signal, keeps
the audio output constant while the radio-frequency (RF) signal fades.
Polarity diversity reception (Fig. 2-42) uses both vertical and horizontal polarization antennas to receive the signal. As in the space diversity system, the
outputs of the vertical and horizontal receivers are combined to produce a constant level output.
Another form of fading, selective fading, derives from the fact that fading is a
function of frequency. The carrier and upper and lower sidebands of an AM signal
have slightly different frequencies, so they arrive out of phase with each other. Although this type of fading is lessened by using single-sideband (SSB) transmission,
that does not help AM users. In those systems, some people use a filtering system that
eliminates the carrier and one sideband; it then reconstitutes the AM signal with a
product detector.
SSB receivers with stable local and product detector oscillators, and a sharp
intermediate-frequency (IF) bandpass filter, can be used to reduce the effects of differential fading of AM signals because of the phasing of the lower sideband (LSB),
upper sideband (USB), and carrier components. Carefully tune the receiver to only
one sideband of the signal, and note when the heterodyne beatnote disappears. The
correct point is characterized by the fact that you can then switch among USB, LSB,
and continuous-wave (CW) modes without changing the received signal output.

Chap02_Carr

4/10/01

1:41 PM

Page 56

56 Radio-wave propagation

2-39 Propagation prediction charts appear in magazines such as QST every month.
(Courtesy of the American Radio Relay League.)

Chap02_Carr

4/10/01

1:42 PM

Page 57

EM wave propagation phenomena 57
F 1 and F 2

XMTR 1
F1

RCVR 1

RCVR 2

XMTR 2
F2
F2  F1
F2  F1

AF 1

AF2

Composite
audio
out

F

2-40 Frequency diversity reduces fading.

Antenna 1

/2

AF1

RCVR 1
Antenna 2

AF2

RCVR 2
/2

Antenna 3

AF3

RCVR 3

Master
local
oscillator

2-41 Spatial diversity.

Composite
audio
output

Chap02_Carr

4/10/01

1:42 PM

Page 58

58 Radio-wave propagation
Horizontal
antenna

RCVR 1

H audio

Composite
audio
output

Vertical
antenna

RCVR 2

V audio

2-42 Polarization diversity.

3

CHAPTER

Transmission lines
TRANSMISSION LINES AND WAVEGUIDES ARE CONDUITS FOR TRANSPORTING RF SIGNALS

between elements of a system. For example, transmission lines are used between an
exciter output and transmitter input, and between the transmitter input and its output, and between the transmitter output and the antenna. Although often erroneously characterized as a “length of shielded wire,” transmission lines are actually
complex networks containing the equivalent of all the three basic electrical components: resistance, capacitance, and inductance. Because of this fact, transmission
lines must be analyzed in terms of an RLC network.

Parallel and coaxial lines
This chapter will consider several types of transmission lines. Both step-function
and sine-wave ac responses will be studied. Because the subject is both conceptual
and analytical, both analogy and mathematical approaches to the theory of transmission lines will be used.
Figure 3-1 shows several basic types of transmission line. Perhaps the oldest and
simplest form is the parallel line shown in Figs. 3-1A through 3-1D. Figure 3-1A
shows an end view of the parallel conductor transmission line. The two conductors,
of diameter d, are separated by a dielectric (which might be air) by a spacing S.
These designations will be used in calculations later. Figure 3-1B shows a type of
parallel line called twin lead. This is the old-fashioned television antenna transmission line. It consists of a pair of parallel conductors separated by a plastic dielectric.
TV-type twin lead has a characteristic impedance of 300 Ω, while certain radio transmitting-antenna twin lead has an impedance of 450 Ω. Another form of twin lead is
open line, shown in Fig. 3-1C. In this case, the wire conductors are separated by an
air dielectric, with support provided by stiff (usually ceramic) insulators. A tie wire
(only one shown) is used to fasten each insulator end to the main conductor. Some
users of open line prefer the form of insulator or supporter shown in Fig. 3-1D. This
Copyright 2001 - the McGraw-Hill Companies

59

Chap03_Carr

4/10/01

3:01 PM

Page 60

60 Transmission lines

S
3-1A Parallel line transmission line (end view).
d

d
(End view)

3-1B Twin-lead transmission line.

Conductors

3-1C Parallel line construction details.

Insulator

Tie

S

3-1D Horseshoe parallel line spreader.

Chap03_Carr

4/10/01

3:01 PM

Page 61

Parallel and coaxial lines 61
form of insulator is made of either plastic or ceramic, and is in the form of a U. The
purpose of this shape is to reduce losses, especially in rainy weather, by increasing
the leakage currents path relative to spacing S.
Parallel lines have been used at VLF, MW, and HF frequencies for decades. Even
antennas into the low VHF are often found using parallel lines. The higher impedance of these lines (relative to coaxial cable) yields lower loss in high-power applications. For years, the VHF, UHF, and microwave application of parallel lines was
limited to educational laboratories, where they are well suited to performing experiments (to about 2 GHz) with simple, low-cost instruments. Today, however, printed
circuit and hybrid semiconductor packaging has given parallel lines a new lease on
life, if not an overwhelming market presence.
Figure 3-1E shows a form of parallel line called shielded twin lead. This type of line
uses the same form of construction as TV-type twin lead, but it also has a braided shielding surrounding it. This feature makes it less susceptible to noise and other problems.
The second form of transmission line, which finds considerable application at
microwave frequencies, is coaxial cable (Figs. 3-1F through 3-1L). This form of
line consists of two cylindrical conductors sharing the same axis (hence “coaxial”),
and separated by a dielectric (Fig. 3-1F). For low frequencies (in flexible cables)
the dielectric may be polyethylene or polyethylene foam, but at higher frequencies
Teflon and other materials are used. Also used, in some applications, are dry air and
dry nitrogen.

Outer
shield

Dielectric

3-1E Shielded twin-lead transmission line.

Parallel
conductors

Outer
conductor

3-1F Coaxial cable (end view).

Dielectric

Inner
conductor

Chap03_Carr

4/10/01

3:01 PM

Page 62

62 Transmission lines
Several forms of coaxial line are available. Flexible coaxial cable is perhaps the
most common form. The outer conductor in such cable is made of either braid or foil
(Fig. 3-1G). Television broadcast receiver antennas provide an example of such cable
from common experience. Another form of flexible or semiflexible coaxial line is helical line (Fig. 3-1H) in which the outer conductor is spiral wound. Hardline (Fig.
3-1I) is coaxial cable that uses a thin-wall pipe as the outer conductor. Some hardline
coax used at microwave frequencies has a rigid outer conductor and a solid dielectric.
Gas-filled line is a special case of hardline that is hollow (Fig. 3-1J), the center
conductor is supported by a series of thin ceramic or Teflon insulators. The dielectric is either anhydrous (i.e., dry) nitrogen or some other inert gas.
Some flexible microwave coaxial cable uses a solid “air-articulated” dielectric
(Fig. 3-1K), in which the inner insulator is not continuous around the center conductor, but rather is ridged. Reduced dielectric losses increase the usefulness of the

Outer
insulator
Inner
conductor
3-1G Coaxial cable (side view).

Braid
Insulating
sheath

Inner
insulator

Dielectric

3-1H Coaxial hardline cable.

Shield
Rigid outer
conductor

Inner
conductor

Dielectric

3-1I Rigid coaxial line.

Inner
conductor

Chap03_Carr

4/10/01

3:01 PM

Page 63

Parallel and coaxial lines 63
Insulators
Center
conductor

3-1J Gas-filled hollow coaxial
line.

Outer conductor

3-1K Articulated coaxial line.
Dielectric
(vaned)

Insulating
sheath

Outer insulator

Outer
shield

Inner
insulator

Center
conductor

Inner
shield

3-1L Double-shielded coaxial line.

cable at higher frequencies. Double-shielded coaxial cable (Fig. 3-1L) provides an
extra measure of protection against radiation from the line, and EMI from outside
sources, from getting into the system.
Stripline, also called microstripline (Fig. 3-1M), is a form of transmission line
used at high UHF and microwave frequencies. The stripline consists of a critically
sized conductor over a ground-plane conductor, and separated from it by a dielectric. Some striplines are sandwiched between two groundplanes and are separated
from each by a dielectric.

Chap03_Carr

4/10/01

3:01 PM

Page 64

64 Transmission lines

Transmission line characteristic impedance (Zo)
The transmission line is an RLC network (see Fig. 3-2), so it has a characteristic
impedance Zo, also sometimes called a surge impedance. Network analysis will
show that Zo is a function of the per unit of length parameters resistance R, conductance G, inductance L, and capacitance C, and is found from
Zo =


R+jωL

G+jωC

[3.1]

where
Zo is the characteristic impedance, in ohms
R is the resistance per unit length, in ohms
G is the conductance per unit length, in mhos
L is the inductance per unit length, in henrys
C is the capacitance per unit length, in farads
ω is the angular frequency in radians per second (2πF)

Stripline

W

Dielectric
3-1M Stripline transmission
line.

T

Groundplane

ZS

GEN

L

R

G

C

C

R
If X >> R
Then: ZO = L/C

L

3-2 Equivalent circuit of transmission line.

ZL

Chap03_Carr

4/10/01

3:01 PM

Page 65

Transmission line characteristic impedance (Zo) 65
In microwave systems the resistances are typically very low compared with the
reactances, so Eq. 3.1 can be reduced to the simplified form:
Zo =


L

C

[3.2]

Example 3-1 A nearly lossless transmission line (R is very small) has a unit
length inductance of 3.75 nH and a unit length capacitance of 1.5 pF. Find the characteristic impedance Zo.
Solution:
Zo =


L

C



3.75 nH × 
10 nH 

1F

1.5 pF × 
10 pF 
1H

=

9

12

=



3.75 × 10–9 ˙H

1.5 × 10–12 F

= 2.5

× 10
3 = 50 Ω
The characteristic impedance for a specific type of line is a function of the conductor size, the conductor spacing, the conductor geometry (see again Fig. 3-1), and
the dielectric constant of the insulating material used between the conductors. The
dielectric constant e is equal to the reciprocal of the velocity (squared) of the wave
when a specific medium is used:
1
e = 2
v

[3.3]

where
e is the dielectric constant (for a perfect vacuum e = 1.000)
v is the velocity of the wave in the medium
(a) Parallel line

 

276
2S
Zo =  log 
e
d

[3.4]

Chap03_Carr

4/10/01

3:01 PM

Page 66

66 Transmission lines
where
Zo is the characteristic impedance, in ohms
e is the dielectric constant
S is the center-to-center spacing of the conductors
d is the diameter of the conductors
(b) Coaxial line

 

138
D
Zo =  log 
e
d

[3.5]

where
D is the diameter of the outer conductor
d is the diameter of the inner conductor
(c) Shielded parallel line
(1 – B2)
276

Zo =  log 2A (1
+ B2)
e





[3.6]

where
A = s/d
B = s/D
(d) Stripline

 

377 T
Zo =  
et W

[3.7A]

where
et is the relative dielectric constant of the printed wiring board (PWB)
T is the thickness of the printed wiring board
W is the width of the stripline conductor
The relative dielectric constant et used above differs from the normal dielectric
constant of the material used in the PWB. The relative and normal dielectric constants move closer together for larger values of the ratio W/T.
Example 3-2 A stripline transmission line is built on a 4-mm-thick printed
wiring board that has a relative dielectric constant of 5.5. Calculate the characteristic impedance if the width of the strip is 2 mm.
Solution:

 

377 T
Zo =  
et W

Chap03_Carr

4/10/01

3:01 PM

Page 67

Transmission line characteristics 67



4 mm
377
= 
5
.5
 2 mm



377
=  (2) = 321 Ω
2.35
In practical situations, we usually don’t need to calculate the characteristic impedance of a stripline, but rather design the line to fit a specific system impedance
(e.g., 50 Ω). We can make some choices of printed circuit material (hence dielectric
constant) and thickness, but even these are usually limited in practice by the availability of standardized boards. Thus, stripline width is the variable parameter. Equation 3.2 can be arranged to the form:
377 T
W= 
Zoe

[3.7B]

The impedance of 50 Ω is accepted as standard for RF systems, except in the
cable TV industry. The reason for this diversity is that power handling ability and low
loss operation don’t occur at the same characteristic impedance. For example, the
maximum power handling ability for coaxial cables occurs at 30 Ω, while the lowest
loss occurs at 77 Ω; 50 Ω is therefore a reasonable tradeoff between the two points.
In the cable TV industry, however, the RF power levels are minuscule, but lines are
long. The tradeoff for TV is to use 75 Ω as the standard system impedance in order
to take advantage of the reduced attenuation factor.

Transmission line characteristics
Velocity factor
In the section preceding this section, we discovered that the velocity of the wave (or
signal) in the transmission line is less than the free-space velocity (i.e., less than the
speed of light). Further, we discovered in Eq. 3.3 that velocity is related to the dielectric constant of the insulating material that separates the conductors in the
transmission line. Velocity factor v is usually specified as a decimal fraction of c,
the speed of light (3 × 108 m/s). For example, if the velocity factor of a transmission
line is rated at “0.66,” then the velocity of the wave is 0.66c, or (0.66) (3 × 108 m/s)
= 1.98 × 108 m/s.
Velocity factor becomes important when designing things like transmission line
transformers, or any other device in which the length of the line is important. In most
cases, the transmission line length is specified in terms of electrical length, which
can be either an angular measurement (e.g., 180° or π radians), or a relative measure
keyed to wavelength (e.g., one-half wavelength, which is the same as 180°). The
physical length of the line is longer than the equivalent electrical length. For example, let’s consider a 1-GHz half-wavelength transmission line.
A rule of thumb tells us that the length of a wave (in meters) in free space is 0.30/F,
where frequency F is expressed in gigahertz; therefore, a half-wavelength line is 0.15/F.

Chap03_Carr

4/10/01

3:01 PM

Page 68

68 Transmission lines
At 1 GHz, the line must be 0.15 m/1 GHz = 0.15 m. If the velocity factor is 0.80, then the
physical length of the transmission line that will achieve the desired electrical length
is [(0.15 m) (v)]/F = [(0.15 m) (0.80)]/1 GHz = 0.12 m. The derivation of the rule of
thumb is “left as an exercise for the student.” (Hint: It comes from the relationship between wavelength, frequency, and velocity of propagation for any form of wave.)
There are certain practical considerations regarding velocity factor that result
from the fact that the physical and electrical lengths are not equal. For example, in
a certain type of phased-array antenna design, radiating elements are spaced a halfwavelength apart, and must be fed 180° (half-wave) out of phase with each other.
The simplest interconnect is to use a half-wave transmission line between the 0°
element and the 180° element. According to the standard wisdom, the transmission
line will create the 180° phase delay required for the correct operation of the antenna. Unfortunately, because of the velocity factor, the physical length for a onehalf electrical wavelength cable is shorter than the free-space half-wave distance
between elements. In other words, the cable will be too short to reach between the
radiating elements by the amount of the velocity factor!
Clearly, velocity factor is a topic that must be understood before transmission
lines can be used in practical situations. Table 3-1 shows the velocity factors for several types of popular transmission line. Because these are nominal values, the actual
velocity factor for any given line should be measured.
Table 3-1. Transmission line characteristics
Type of line

Zo (ohms)

1

300
450
300
300
*
*
*
*

⁄2-in. TV parallel line (air dielectric)
1-in. TV parallel line (air dielectric)
TV twin lead
UHF TV twin lead
Polyethylene coaxial cable
Polyethylene foam coaxial cable
Air-space polyethylene foam coaxial cable
Teflon

Velocity factor
v
0.95
0.95
0.82
0.80
0.66
0.79
0.86
0.70

* Various impedances depending upon cable type.

Transmission line noise
Transmission lines are capable of generating noise and spurious voltages that are
seen by the system as valid signals. Several such sources exist. One source is the
coupling between noise currents flowing in the outer conductor and the inner conductor. Such currents are induced by nearby electromagnetic interference and other
sources (e.g., connection to a noisy groundplane). Although coaxial design reduces
noise pickup, compared with parallel line, the potential for EMI exists. Selection of
high-grade line, with a high degree of shielding, reduces the problem.
Another source of noise is thermal noises in the resistances and conductances.
This type of noise is proportional to resistance and temperature.

Chap03_Carr

4/10/01

3:01 PM

Page 69

Transmission line characteristics 69
There is also noise created by mechanical movement of the cable. One species
results from the movement of the dielectric against the two conductors. This form of
noise is caused by electrostatic discharges in much the same manner as the spark
created by rubbing a piece of plastic against woolen cloth.
A second species of mechanically generated noise is piezoelectricity in the dielectric. Although more common in cheap cables, one should be aware of it. Mechanical deformation of the dielectric causes electrical potentials to be generated.
Both species of mechanically generated noise can be reduced or eliminated by
proper mounting of the cable. Although rarely a problem at lower frequencies, such
noise can be significant at microwave frequencies when signals are low.

Coaxial cable capacitance
A coaxial transmission line possesses a certain capacitance per unit of length. This
capacitance is defined by
pF
24e
C =  
[3.8A]
log (D/d)
m
A long run of coaxial cable can build up a large capacitance. For example, a
common type of coax is rated at 65 pF/m. A 150-m roll thus has a capacitance of
65 pF/m × (150 m), or 9750 pF. When charged with a high voltage, as is done in
breakdown voltage tests at the factory, the cable acts like a charged high-voltage
capacitor. Although rarely (if ever) lethal to humans, the stored voltage in new
cable can deliver a nasty electrical shock and can irreparably damage electronic
components.

Coaxial cable cutoff frequency Fo
The normal mode in which a coaxial cable propagates a signal is as a transverse
electromagnetic (TEM) wave, but others are possible—and usually undesirable.
There is a maximum frequency above which TEM propagation becomes a problem, and higher modes dominate. Coaxial cable should not be used above a frequency of
6.75
F =  GHz
(D + d) e

[3.8B]

where
F is the TEM-mode cutoff frequency
D is the diameter of the outer conductor, in inches
d is the diameter of the inner conductor, in inches
e is the dielectric constant
When maximum operating frequencies for cable are listed, it is the TEM mode
that is cited. Beware of attenuation, however, when making selections for microwave
frequencies. A particular cable may have a sufficiently high TEM-mode frequency,
but still exhibit a high attenuation per unit length at X or Ku bands.

Chap03_Carr

4/10/01

3:01 PM

Page 70

70 Transmission lines

Transmission line responses
In order to understand the operation of transmission lines, we need to consider two
cases: step-function response and the steady-state ac response. The step-function
case involves a single event when a voltage at the input of the line snaps from zero
(or a steady value) to a new (or nonzero) value, and remains there until all action
dies out. This response tells us something of the behavior of pulses in the line, and in
fact is used to describe the response to a single-pulse stimulus. The steady-state ac
response tells us something of the behavior of the line under stimulation by a sinusoidal RF signal.

Step-function response of a transmission line
Figure 3-3 shows a parallel transmission line with characteristic impedance Zo connected to a load impedance ZL. The generator at the input of the line consists of a
voltage source V in series with a source impedance Zs and a switch S1. Assume for
the present that all impedances are pure resistances (i.e., R + j0). Also, assume
that Zs = Zo.
When the switch is closed at time To (Fig. 3-4A), the voltage at the input of the
line (Vin) jumps to V/2. In Fig. 3-2, you may have noticed that the LC circuit resembles a delay line circuit. As might be expected, therefore, the voltage wavefront
propagates along the line at a velocity v of:
1
v= 
L
C


[3.9]

where
v is the velocity, in meters per second
L is the inductance, in henrys
C is the capacitance, in farads

S1

L

Zs
Zo
V


Zs=ZL

3-3 Schematic example of transmission line.

ZL

Chap03_Carr

4/10/01

3:01 PM

Page 71

Transmission line responses 71
V
V/

T0

2

V

A
L/

0

L

2

V

3-4 Step-function propagation
along transmission line at
three points.

V/

T0

2

T1
V

B
L/

0

2

L

T1

Td

L/

L

V
V/

T0

2

C

0

2

At time T1 (Fig. 3-4B), the wavefront has propagated one-half the distance L,
and by Td it has propagated the entire length of the cable (Fig. 3-4C).
If the load is perfectly matched (i.e., ZL = Zo), then the load absorbs the wave
and no component is reflected. But in a mismatched system (ZL is not equal to Zo),
a portion of the wave is reflected back down the line toward the generator.
Figure 3-5 shows the rope analogy for reflected pulses in a transmission line. A
taut rope (Fig. 3-5A) is tied to a rigid wall that does not absorb any of the energy in
the pulse propagated down the rope. When the free end of the rope is given a vertical displacement (Fig. 3-5B), a wave is propagated down the rope at velocity v (Fig.
3-5C). When the pulse hits the wall (Fig. 3-5D), it is reflected (Fig. 3-5E) and propagates back down the rope toward the free end (Fig. 3-5F).
If a second pulse is propagated down the line before the first pulse dies out, then
there will be two pulses on the line at the same time (Fig. 3-6A). When the two
pulses interfere, the resultant will be the algebraic sum of the two. In the event that
a pulse train is applied to the line, the interference pattern will set up standing
waves, an example of which is shown in Fig. 3-6B.

Reflection coefficient
The reflection coefficient Γ of a circuit containing a transmission line and load impedance is a measure of how well the system is matched. The absolute value of the re-

Chap03_Carr

4/10/01

3:01 PM

Page 72

72 Transmission lines

A
B

V

C

V

D

E
V

F
V

3-5 Rope analogy to transmission line.

1

2

3-6A Interfering opposite waves.

Chap03_Carr

4/10/01

3:01 PM

Page 73

Transmission line responses 73

3-6B Standing waves.

flection coefficient varies from –1 to +1, depending upon the magnitude of reflection;
Γ = 0 indicates a perfect match with no reflection, while –1 indicates a short-circuited
load, and +1 indicates an open circuit. To understand the reflection coefficient, let’s
start with a basic definition of the resistive load impedance Z = R + j0:
V
ZL = 
I

[3.10]

where
ZL is the load impedance R + j0
V is the voltage across the load
I is the current flowing in the load
Because there are both reflected and incident waves, we find that V and I are actually the sum of incident and reflected voltages and currents, respectively. Therefore:
V
ZL = 
I
Vinc + Vref
ZL = 
Iinc + Iref
where
Vinc is the incident (i.e., forward) voltage
Vref is the reflected voltage
Iinc is the incident current
Iref is the reflected current

[3.11A]
[3.11B]

Chap03_Carr

4/10/01

3:01 PM

Page 74

74 Transmission lines
Because of Ohm’s law, you can define the currents in terms of voltage, current,
and the characteristic impedance of the line:
Vinc
Iinc = 
[3.12]
Zo
and
–Vref
Iinc = 
Zo

[3.13]

(The minus sign in Eq. 3.13 indicates that a direction reversal has taken place.)
The two expressions for current (Eqs. 3.12 and 3.13) may be substituted into
Eq. 3.11 to yield
ZL =

Vinc + Vref

[3.14]

Vinc
Vref
–
Zo
Zo

The reflection coefficient Γ is defined as the ratio of reflected voltage to incident
voltage:
Vref
Γ= 
Vinc

[3.15]

ZL – Zo
Γ= 
ZL + Zo

[3.16]

Using this ratio in Eq. 3.14 gives

Example 3-3 A 50-Ω transmission line is connected to a 30-Ω resistive load.
Calculate the reflection coefficient Γ.
Solution:
ZL – Zo
Γ= 
ZL + Zo
(50 Ω) – (30 Ω)
= 
(50 Ω) + (30 Ω)
20
=  = 0.25
80

Chap03_Carr

4/10/01

3:01 PM

Page 75

Transmission line responses 75
Example 3-4 In Example 3-3, the incident voltage is 3 V rms. Calculate the reflected voltage.
Solution:
If
Vref
Γ= 
Vinc
then
Vref = Γ Vinc
= (0.25) (3 V) = 0.75 V
The phase of the reflected signal is determined by the relationship of load impedance and transmission line characteristic impedance. For resistive loads (Z = R +
j0): if the ratio ZL/Zo is 1.0, then there is no reflection; if ZL/Zo is less than 1.0, then
the reflected signal is 180° out of phase with the incident signal; if the ratio ZL/Zo is
greater than 1.0 then the reflected signal is in phase with the incident signal.
In summary:

Ratio

Angle of
reflection

ZL/Zo = 1
ZL/Zo < 1
ZL/Zo > 1

No reflection
180°
0°

The step-function (or pulse) response of the transmission line leads to a powerful means of analyzing the line, and its load, on an oscilloscope. Figure 3-7A shows
(in schematic form) the test set-up for time domain reflectometry (TDR) measurements. An oscilloscope and a pulse (or square-wave) generator are connected in
parallel across the input end of the transmission line. Figure 3-7B shows a pulse test
jig built by the author for testing lines at HF. The small shielded box contains a TTL
square-wave oscillator circuit. Although a crystal oscillator can be used, an RC timed
circuit running close to 1000 kHz is sufficient. In Fig. 3-7B, you can see the test pulse
generator box is connected in parallel with the cable under test and the input of the
oscilloscope. A closer look is seen in Fig. 3-7C. A BNC “tee” connector and a double
male BNC adapter are used to interconnect the box with the ’scope.
If a periodic waveform is supplied by the generator, then the display on the oscilloscope will represent the sum of reflected and incident pulses. The duration of
the pulse (i.e., pulse width), or one-half the period of the square wave, is adjusted so
that the returning reflected pulse arrives approximately in the center of the incident
pulse.
Figure 3-8 shows a TDR display under several circumstances. Approximately
30 m of coaxial cable, with a velocity factor of 0.66, was used in a test setup similar
to Fig. 3-7. The pulse width was approximately 0.9 microseconds (µs). The hori-

Chap03_Carr

4/10/01

3:01 PM

Page 76

76 Transmission lines
Oscilloscope

Zo

Zs=Zo
Zs
Pulse
generator

3-7A Time domain reflectometry setup.

3-7B Test setup for impromptu time domain reflectometry.

ZL

Chap03_Carr

4/10/01

3:01 PM

Page 77

Transmission line responses 77

3-7C Close-up of RF
connections.

0.3 µs

3-8A Idealized TDR pulse. Small “pip”
on top is reflected signal
interfering with forward pulse.
0.9 µs

zontal sweep time on the ’scope was adjusted to show only one pulse—which, in this
case, represented one-half of a 550-kHz square wave (Fig. 3-8B).
The displayed trace in Fig. 3-8B shows the pattern when the load is matched to
the line (ZL = Zo). A slight discontinuity exists on the high side of the pulse, and this
represents a small reflected wave. Even though the load and line were supposedly
matched, the connectors at the end of the line presented a slight impedance discontinuity that shows up on the ’scope as a reflected wave. In general, any discontinuity
in the line, any damage to the line, any too-sharp bend, or other anomaly, causes a
slight impedance variation, and hence a reflection.

Chap03_Carr

4/10/01

3:01 PM

Page 78

78 Transmission lines

3-8B TDR pulse with no significant
reflection.

Notice that the anomaly occurs approximately one-third of the 0.9-µs duration
(or 0.3 µs) after the onset of the pulse. This fact tells us that the reflected wave arrives back at the source 0.3 µs after the incident wave leaves. Because this time period represents a round-trip, you can conclude that the wave required 0.3 µs/2, or
0.15 µs to propagate the length of the line. Knowing that the velocity factor is 0.66
for that type of line, you can calculate its approximate length:
Length = cvT

[3.17]

(3 × 108 m/s)
= 
× (0.66) × (1.5 × 10–7 s)
s
= 29.7 m
which agrees “within experimental accuracy” with the 30 m actual length prepared for the experiment ahead of time. Thus, the TDR setup (or a TDR instrument) can be used to measure the length of a transmission line. A general
equation is
cvTd
Lmeters = 
2

[3.18]

where
L is the length in meters
c is the velocity of light (3 × 108 m/s)
v is the velocity factor of the transmission line
Td is the round-trip time between the onset of the pulse, and the first reflection
Figures 3-8C through 3-8H show the behavior of the transmission line to the
stepfunction when the load impedance is mismatched to the transmission line (ZL
not equal to Zo). Figure 3-8C shows what happens when the load impedance is less
than the line impedance (in this case, 0.5Zo). The reflected wave is inverted, and

Chap03_Carr

4/10/01

3:01 PM

Page 79

Transmission line responses 79

3-8C ZL<Zo.

3-8D ZL>Zo.

sums with the incident wave along the top of the pulse. The reflection coefficient can
be determined by examining the relative amplitudes of the two waves.
The opposite situation, in which ZL is 2Zo, is shown in Fig. 3-8D. In this case, the
reflected wave is in phase with the incident wave, so it adds to the incident wave as
shown. The cases for a short-circuited load and an open-circuited load are shown in
Figs. 3-8E and 3-8F, respectively. The cases of reactive loads are shown in Figs. 3-8G
and 3-8H. The waveform in Fig. 3-8G resulted from a capacitance in series with a
50-Ω (matched) resistance; the waveform in Fig. 3-8H resulted from a 50-Ω resistance in series with an inductance.

The ac response of the transmission line
When a CW RF signal is applied to a transmission line, the excitation is sinusoidal
(Fig. 3-9), so it becomes useful for us to investigate the steady-state ac response of
the line. The term steady-state implies a sine wave of constant amplitude, phase, and

Chap03_Carr

4/10/01

3:01 PM

Page 80

80 Transmission lines

3-8E ZL = 0.

3-8F

ZL = ∞.

3-8G

ZL = 50 – jXC.

Chap03_Carr

4/10/01

3:01 PM

Page 81

Transmission line responses 81

3-8H

ZL = 50 + jXL

L

Zo

ZS

ZL

3-9 AC-excited transmission line.

frequency. When ac is applied to the input of the line, it propagates along the line at
a given velocity. The ac signal amplitude and phase will decay exponentially:
VR = Ve–yl

[3.19]

Chap03_Carr

4/10/01

3:01 PM

Page 82

82 Transmission lines
where
VR is the voltage received at the far end of the line
V is the applied voltage
l is the length of the line
y is the propagation constant of the line
The propagation constant y is defined in various equivalent ways, each of which
serves to illustrate its nature. For example, the propagation constant is proportional
to the product of impedance and admittance characteristics of the line:
y = Z
Y


[3.20]

or, since Z = R + j ω L and Y = G + j ω C, we may write:
+
jw
l)(G
+
jw
C
)
y  (R

[3.21]

You can also write an expression for the propagation constant in terms of the
line attenuation constant a and phase constant B:
y = a + jB

[3.22]

If you can assume that susceptance dominates conductance in the admittance
term, and reactance dominates resistance in the impedance term (both usually true
at microwave frequencies), then we may neglect the R and G terms altogether and
write:
y = jω L
C


[3.23]

We may also reduce the phase constant B to
B = ω L
C


[3.24]

or
B = ω ZoC

rad/m

[3.25]

and, of course, the characteristic impedance remains:
Zo = L
C


[3.26]

Special cases
The impedance “looking into” a transmission line (Z) is the impedance presented to
the source by the combination of load impedance and transmission line characteristic impedance. Below are presented equations that define the looking-in impedance
seen by a generator (or source) driving a transmission line.

Chap03_Carr

4/10/01

3:01 PM

Page 83

Transmission line responses 83
The case where the load impedance, and line characteristic impedance, are
matched is defined by
ZL = RL + j0 = Zo
In other words, the load impedance is resistive and equal to the characteristic
impedance of the transmission line. In this case, the line and load are matched, and
the impedance looking in will be a simple Z = ZL = Zo. In other cases, however, we
find different situations where ZL is not equal to Zo.
1. ZL is not equal to Zo in a random-length lossy line:



ZL + Zo tanh (yl)
Z = (Zo) 
Zo + ZL tanh (yl)

[3.27]

where
Z is the impedance looking in, in ohms
ZL is the load impedance, in ohms
Zo is the line characteristic impedance, in ohms
l is the length of the line, in meters
y is the propagation constant
2. ZL not equal to Zo in a lossless, or very low loss, random-length line:



ZL + jZo tan (Bl)
Z = (Zo) 
Zo + jZL tan (Bl)

[3.28]

Equations 3.27 and 3.28 serve for lines of any random length. For lines that are either integer multiples of a half-wavelength, or odd-integer (i.e., 1, 3, 5, 7, . . ., etc.) multiples of a quarter-wavelength, special solutions for these equations are found—and
some of these solutions are very useful in practical situations. For example, consider . . .
3. Half-wavelength lossy lines:
Z = (Zo)



ZL + Zo tanh (al)

Zo + ZL tanh (al)

[3.29]

Example 3-5 A lossless 50-Ω (Zo) transmission line is exactly one-half wavelength long and is terminated in a load impedance of Z = 30 + j0. Calculate the input
impedance looking into the line. (Note: in a lossless line a = 0.)
Solution:



ZL + Zo tanh (al)
Z = (Zo) 
Zo + ZL tanh (al)

Chap03_Carr

4/10/01

3:01 PM

Page 84

84 Transmission lines

In Example 3-5 we discovered that the impedance looking into a lossless (or
very low loss) half-wavelength transmission line is the load impedance:
Z = ZL

[3.30]

The fact that line input impedance equals load impedance, is very useful in certain practical situations. For example, a resistive impedance is not changed by the
line length. Therefore, when an impedance is inaccessible for measurement purposes, the impedance can be measured through a transmission line that is an integer
multiple of a half wavelength.
Our next special case involves a quarter-wavelength transmission line, and those
that are odd integer multiples of quarter-wavelengths (of course, even integer multiples of a quarter wavelength obey the half-wavelength criteria).
4. Quarter-wavelength lossy lines:



ZL + Zo coth (al)
Z = (Zo) 
Zo + ZL coth (al)

[3.31]

and
5. Quarter-wavelength lossless or very low loss lines:
(Zo)2
Z= 
ZL

[3.32]

From Eq. 3.32, you can discover an interesting property of the quarter-wavelength transmission line. First, divide each side of the equation by Zo:
[Zo]2
Z
=
ZLZo
Zo

[3.33]

Z
= o
ZL

[3.34]

Chap03_Carr

4/10/01

3:01 PM

Page 85

Transmission line responses 85
The ratio Z/Zo shows an inversion of the load impedance ratio ZL/Zo, or, stated
another way,
Z
1
=
Zo
ZL/Zo

[3.35]

Again, from Eq. 3.32, you can deduce another truth about quarter-wavelength
transmission lines:
If
Z
o
Z= 
ZL

[3.36]

o
ZZL = Z

[3.37]

Zo = Z
Z
L

[3.38]

then

which means

Equation 3.38 shows that a quarter-wavelength transmission line can be used as
an impedance matching network. Called a Q section, the quarter-wavelength
transmission line used for impedance matching requires a characteristic impedance
Zo—if Z is the source impedance and ZL is the load impedance.
Example 3-6 A 50-Ω source must be matched to a load impedance of 36 Ω.
Find the characteristic impedance required of a Q section matching network.
Solution:
Z = Z
Z
L
= (5
0
)
Ω(3
6
)
Ω
= 1
8
0
0

Ω2 = 42 Ω
6. Transmission line as a reactance: Reconsider Eq. 3.28, which related impedance looking in to load impedance and line length:



ZL + jZo tan (Bl)
Z = (Zo) 
Zo + jZL tan (Bl)

[3.39]

Now, for the case of a shorted line (i.e., ZL = 0), the solution is



(0) + jZo tan (B l)
Z = (Zo) 
Zo + j(0) tan (B l)

[3.40]

Chap03_Carr

4/10/01

3:01 PM

Page 86

86 Transmission lines
jZo tan (Bl)
Z = (Zo) 
Zo



[3.41]

Z = j Zo tan (Bl)

[3.42]

Recall from Eq. 3.25 that
B = WZoC

[3.43]

Substituting Eq. 3.43 into Eq. 3.42 produces
Z = j Zo tan (ω ZoCl)

[3.44]

Z = j Zo tan (2πFZoCl)

[3.45]

or

Because the solutions to Eqs. 3.44 and 3.45 are multiplied by the j operator, the
impedance is actually a reactance (Z = 0 + jX). It is possible to achieve almost any
possible reactance (within certain practical limitations) by adjusting the length of
the transmission line and shorting the “load” end. This fact leads us to a practical
method for impedance matching.
Figure 3-10A shows a circuit in which an unmatched load is connected to a
transmission line with characteristic impedance Zo. The load impedance ZL is of the
form Z = R ± jX, and, in this case, it is equal to 50 – j20.
A complex impedance load can be matched to its source by interposing the complex conjugate of the impedance. For example, in the case where Z = 50 – j20, the
matching impedance network will require an impedance of 50 + j20 Ω. The two impedances combine to produce a result of 50 Ω. The situation of Fig. 3-10A shows a
matching stub with a reactance equal in magnitude, but opposite in sign, with respect to the reactive component of the load impedance. In this case, the stub has a
reactance of +j20 Ω to cancel a reactance of –j20 Ω in the load.
A quarter-wavelength shorted stub is a special case of the stub concept that
finds particular application in microwave circuits. Waveguides (Chap. 19) are based
on the properties of the quarter-wavelength shorted stub. Figure 3-10B shows a
quarter-wave stub and its current distribution. The current is maximum across the
short, but wave cancellation forces it to zero at the terminals. Because Z = V/I, when
I goes to zero, the impedance becomes infinite. Thus, a quarter-wavelength stub has
an infinite impedance at its resonant frequency, and redundant acts as an insulator.
This concept may be hard to swallow, but the stub is a “metal insulator.”

Standing wave ratio
The reflection phenomenon was noted earlier during the coverage of the stepfunction and single-pulse response of a transmission line; the same phenomenon also
applies when the transmission line is excited with an ac signal. When a transmission

Chap03_Carr

4/10/01

3:02 PM

Page 87

Transmission line responses 87
R = 50 

Transmission
line (Zo = 50 )
To
source

Zo = 50 

X=
j20 

Shorted
matching
stub (X =

Zo = 50  j20 

j20 )

3-10A Stub matching system.

line is not matched to its load, some of the energy is absorbed by the load and some
is reflected back down the line toward the source. The interference of incident (or
“forward”) and reflected (or “reverse”) waves creates standing waves on the transmission line.
If the voltage or current is measured along the line, it will vary, depending on the
load, according to Fig. 3-11. Figure 3-11A shows the voltage-versus-length curve for
a matched line (i.e., where ZL = Zo). The line is said to be “flat” because the voltage
(and current) is constant all along the line. But now consider Figs. 3-11B and 3-11C.
Figure 3-11B shows the voltage distribution over the length of the line when the
load end of the line is shorted (i.e., ZL = 0). Of course, at the load end the voltage is
zero, which results from zero impedance. The same impedance and voltage situation is repeated every half-wavelength down the line from the load end toward
the generator. Voltage minima are called nodes, and voltage maxima are called
antinodes.
The pattern in Fig. 3-11C results when the line is unterminated (open) (i.e.,
ZL = ∞). Note that the pattern is the same shape as Fig. 3-11B (shorted line), but
the phase is shifted 90°. In both cases, the reflection is 100 percent, but the phase
of the reflected wave is opposite.
Figure 3-11D shows the situation in which ZL is not equal to Zo, but is neither
zero nor infinite. In this case, the nodes represent some finite voltage, Vmin, rather

Chap03_Carr

4/10/01

3:02 PM

Page 88

88 Transmission lines
I

Imax

3-10B Quarter-wavelength stub.
Length
/
2

0

Z

/

4

than zero. The standing wave ratio (SWR) reveals the relationship between load
and line.
If the current along the line is measured, the pattern will resemble the patterns
of Fig. 3-11. The SWR is then called ISWR, to indicate the fact that it came from a
current measurement. Similarly, if the SWR is derived from voltage measurements it
is called VSWR. Perhaps because voltage is easier to measure, VSWR is the term
most commonly used in most radio work.
VSWR can be specified in any of several equivalent ways:
1. From incident voltage (Vi ) and reflected voltage (Vi ):
Vi + Vr
VSWR = 
Vi – Vr
2. From transmission line voltage measurements (Fig. 3-11D):
Vmax
VSWR = 
Vmin

[3.46]

[3.47]

Chap03_Carr

4/10/01

3:02 PM

Page 89

Transmission line responses 89
3. From load and line characteristic impedances:
(ZL > Zo) VSWR = ZL/Zo

[3.48]

(ZL < Zo) VSWR = Zo/ZL

[3.49]

4. From incident (Pi ) and reflected (Pr ) power:
rP
/ i
1 + P
VSWR = 
1 – P
rP
/ i

[3.50]

5. From reflection coefficient ():
1+Γ
VSWR = 
1–Γ

[3.51]

It is also possible to determine the reflection coefficient Γ from a knowledge of
VSWR:
VSWR – 1
 = 
VSWR + 1

[3.52]

The relationship between reflection coefficient Γ and VSWR is shown in Fig.
3-11D.
VSWR is usually expressed as a ratio. For example, when ZL is 100 Ω and Zo is
50 Ω, the VSWR is ZL/Zo = 100 Ω/50 Ω = 2, which is usually expressed as VSWR = 2:1.
VSWR can also be expressed in decibel form:
VSWR = 20 log (VSWR)

[3.53]

Example 3-7 A transmission line is connected to a mismatched load. Calculate
both the VSWR and VSWR decibel equivalent if the reflection coefficient Γ is 0.25.
Solution:
1+Γ
(a) VSWR = 
1–Γ
1 + 0.25
=
1 – 0.25
1.25
=  = 1.67:1
0.75
(b) VSWRdB = 20 log (VSWR)
= (20) (log 1.67)
= (20) (0.22) = 4.3 dB

Chap03_Carr

4/10/01

3:02 PM

Page 90

90 Transmission lines
V

ZL = Z o

A



0



4

2

3

2

3
4



4

Load
end

Toward
source

V

ZL = 0

B



0



4



Load
end

Toward
source

V

ZL = 

C



0
Load
end

4



2

3
4



Toward
source

3-11 Voltage versus electrical length: (A) Matched impedances, (B) ZL = 0, (C) ZL = infinite.

Chap03_Carr

4/10/01

3:02 PM

Page 91

Transmission line responses 91
V
ZL  Zo

D



0

4



3
4

2



Load
end

Toward
source

3-11 Continued: (D) ZL not equal to Zo.

The SWR is regarded as important in systems for several reasons. The base of
these reasons is the fact that the reflected wave represents energy lost to the load.
For example, in an antenna system, less power is radiated if some of its input power
is reflected back down the transmission line, because the antenna feedpoint impedance does not match the transmission line characteristic impedance. The next section covers the problem of mismatch losses.

Mismatch (VSWR) losses
The power reflected from a mismatched load represents a loss, and will have implications that range from negligible to profound, depending on the situation. For example, one result might be a slight loss of signal strength at a distant point from an
antenna. A more serious problem can result in the destruction of the output device
in a transmitter. The latter problem so plagued early solid-state transmitters that
designers opted to include shutdown circuitry to sense high VSWR, and turn down
output power proportionally.
In microwave measurements, VSWR on the transmission lines (that interconnect devices under test, instruments, and signal sources) can cause erroneous readings—and invalid measurements.
Determination of VSWR losses must take into account two VSWR situations.
Figure 3-9 shows a transmission line of impedance Zo interconnecting a load impedance ZL, and a source with an output impedance Zs. There is a potential for impedance mismatch at both ends of the line.
In the case where one end of the line is matched (either Zs or ZL), the mismatch
loss caused by SWR at the mismatched end is

 

ML = –10 log 1 –

SWR – 1

SWR + 1

2



[3.54]

Chap03_Carr

4/10/01

3:02 PM

Page 92

92 Transmission lines
which from Eq. 3.52 is
ML = –10 log (1 – Γ2)

[3.55]

Example 3-8 A coaxial transmission line with a characteristic impedance of 50
Ω is connected to the 50-Ω output (Zo) of a signal generator, and also to a 20-W load
impedance ZL . Calculate the mismatch loss.
Solution:
(a) First find the VSWR:
VSWR = Zo/ZL
= (50 Ω)/(20 Ω) = 2.5:1
(b) Mismatch loss:

 

SWR – 1

SWR + 1



 

2.5 – 1

2.5 + 1



2

ML = –10 log 1 –
= –10 log 1 –

 

1.5
= –10 log 1 – 
3.5



2

2

= –10 log [1 – (0.43)2]
= –10 log [1 – 0.185]
= –10 log [0.815]
= (–10) (–0.089) = 0.89
When both ends of the line are mismatched, a different equation is required:
ML = 20 log [1 ± (Γ1 × Γ2)]

[3.56]

where
Γ1 is the reflection coefficient at the source end of the line,
(VSWR1 – 1)/(VSWR1 + 1)
Γ2 is the reflection coefficient at the load end of the line,
(VSWR2 – 1)/(VSWR2 + 1)
Note that the solution to Eq. 3.56 has two values: [1 + (Γ1Γ2)] and [1 – (Γ1Γ2)].
The equations reflect the mismatch loss solution for low-loss or “lossless” transmission lines. This is a close approximation in some situations; however, it is insufficient when the line is lossy. Although not very important at low frequencies, loss
becomes higher at microwave frequencies. Interference between incident and re-

Chap03_Carr

4/10/01

3:02 PM

Page 93

Transmission line responses 93
flected waves produces increased current at certain antinodes—which increases
ohmic losses—and increased voltage at certain antinodes—which increases dielectric losses. It is the latter that increases with frequency. Equation 3.57 relates reflection coefficient and line losses to determine total loss on a given line.
n2 – Γ2
Loss = 10 log 
n – nΓ2





[3.57]

where
Loss is the total line loss in decibels
Γ is the reflection coefficient
n is the quantity 10(A/10)
A is the total attenuation presented by the line, in decibels, when the line is properly
matched (ZL = Zo)
Example 3-9 A 50-Ω transmission line is terminated in a 30-Ω resistive impedance. The line is rated at a loss of 3 dB/100 ft at 1 GHz. Calculate (a) loss in 5 ft of line,
(b) reflection coefficient, and (c) total loss in a 5-ft line mismatched per above.
Solution:
3 dB
(a) A =  × 5 ft = 0.15 dB
100 ft
ZL – Zo
(b) Γ = 
ZL + Zo
50 – 30
=
50 + 30
= 20/80 = 0.25
(c) n = 10(A/10)
= 10(0.15/10)
= 10(0.015) = 1.04
n2 – Γ2
Loss = 10 log 
n – nΓ2





(1.04)2 – (0.25)2
= 10 log 
1.04 – (1.04) (0.25)2




1.082 – 0.063
= 10 log 
1.04 – (1.04) (0.063)



1.019
= 10 log 
1.04 – 0.066



Chap03_Carr

4/10/01

3:02 PM

Page 94

94 Transmission lines



1.019
= 10 log 
0.974



= 10 log (1.046)
= (10) (0.02) = 0.2 dB
Compare the matched line loss (A = 0.15 dB) with the total loss (Loss = 0.2 dB),
which includes mismatch loss and line loss. The difference (i.e., Loss – A) is only
0.05 dB. If the VSWR was considerably larger, however, the loss would rise.

4

CHAPTER

The Smith chart
THE MATHEMATICS OF TRANSMISSION LINES, AND CERTAIN OTHER DEVICES, BECOMES

cumbersome at times, especially in dealing with complex impedances and “nonstandard” situations. In 1939, Phillip H. Smith published a graphical device for solving
these problems, and an improved version of the chart followed in 1945. That graphic
aid, somewhat modified over time, is still in constant use in microwave electronics,
and other fields where complex impedances and transmission line problems are
found. The Smith chart is indeed a powerful tool for the RF designer.

Smith chart components
The modern Smith chart is shown in Fig. 4-1. It consists of a series of overlapping orthogonal circles (i.e., circles that intersect each other at right angles). This chapter
will dissect the Smith chart, so that the origin and use of these circles is apparent.
The set of orthogonal circles makes up the basic structure of the Smith chart.

The normalized impedance line
A baseline is highlighted in Fig. 4-2, and bisects the Smith chart outer circle. This
line is called the pure resistance line, and forms the reference for measurements
made on the chart. Recall that a complex impedance contains both resistance and
reactance, and is expressed in the mathematical form:
Z = R ± jX

Copyright 2001 - the McGraw-Hill Companies

[4.1]

95

Chap04_Carr

4/10/01

1:32 PM

Page 96

96 The Smith chart

4-1 The Smith chart. (Courtesy of Kay Elementrics)

Chap04_Carr

4/10/01

1:32 PM

Page 97

Smith chart components 97
where
Z is the complex impedance
R is the resistive component of the impedance
X is the reactive component of the impedance*
The pure resistance line represents the situation where X = 0, and the impedance is therefore equal to the resistive component only. In order to make the Smith
chart universal, the impedances along the pure resistance line are normalized with
reference to system impedance (e.g., Zo in transmission lines); for most microwave
RF systems the system impedance is standardized at 50 Ω. In order to normalize the
actual impedance, divide it by the system impedance. For example, if the load impedance of a transmission line is ZL, and the characteristic impedance of the line is
Zo, then Z = ZL/Zo. In other words,
R ± jX
Z= 
Zo

[4.2]

The pure resistance line is structured such that the system standard impedance
is in the center of the chart, and has a normalized value of 1.0 (see point A in Fig. 42). This value derives from the fact that Zo/Zo = 1.0.
To the left of the 1.0 point are decimal fraction values used to denote impedances less than the system impedance. For example, in a 50-Ω transmission line system with a 25-Ω load impedance, the normalized value of impedance is 25 Ω/50 Ω or
0.50 (“B” in Fig. 4-2). Similarly, points to the right of 1.0 are greater than 1 and denote impedances that are higher than the system impedance. For example, in a 50Ω system connected to a 100-Ω resistive load, the normalized impedance is 100 Ω/50
Ω, or 2.0; this value is shown as point C in Fig. 4-2. By using normalized impedances,
you can use the Smith chart for almost any practical combination of system, and load
and/or source, impedances, whether resistive, reactive, or complex.
Reconversion of the normalized impedance to actual impedance values is done
by multiplying the normalized impedance by the system impedance. For example, if
the resistive component of a normalized impedance is 0.45, then the actual impedance is
Z = (Znormal ) (Zo )
[4.3]
= (0.45) (50 Ω)

[4.4]

= 22.5 Ω

[4.5]

The constant resistance circles
The isoresistance circles, also called the constant resistance circles, represent
points of equal resistance. Several of these circles are shown highlighted in Fig. 4-3.
These circles are all tangent to the point at the righthand extreme of the pure resis*According to the standard sign convention the inductive reactance (XL ) is positive (+) and the capacitive reactance (Xc ) is negative (–). The term X in Eq. 4.1 above is the difference between the two reactances (X = XL – Xc ).

Chap04_Carr

4/10/01

1:33 PM

Page 98

98 The Smith chart

B

A

C

4-2 Normalized impedance line. (Courtesy of Kay Elementrics)

Chap04_Carr

4/10/01

1:33 PM

Page 99

Smith chart components 99

A

4-3 Constant resistance circles. (Courtesy of Kay Elementrics)

Chap04_Carr

4/10/01

1:33 PM

Page 100

100 The Smith chart
tance line, and are bisected by that line. When you construct complex impedances
(for which X = nonzero) on the Smith chart, the points on these circles will all have
the same resistive component. Circle A, for example, passes through the center of
the chart, so it has a normalized constant resistance of 1.0. Note that impedances
that are pure resistances (i.e., Z = R + j0) will fall at the intersection of a constant resistance circle and the pure resistance line, and complex impedances (i.e., X not
equal to zero) will appear at any other points on the circle. In Fig. 4-3, circle A
passes through the center of the chart, so it represents all points on the chart with a
normalized resistance of 1.0. This particular circle is sometimes called the unity
resistance circle.

The constant reactance circles
Constant reactance circles are highlighted in Fig. 4-4. The circles (or circle segments) above the pure resistance line (Fig. 4-4A) represent the inductive reactance (+X ), and those circles (or segments) below the pure resistance line (Fig.
4-4B) represent capacitive reactance (–X). In both cases, circle A represents a
normalized reactance of 0.80.
One of the outer circles (i.e., circle A in Fig. 4-4C) is called the pure reactance
circle. Points along circle A represent reactance only; in other words, an impedance
of Z = 0 ± jX (R = 0).
Figure 4-4D shows how to plot impedance and admittance on the Smith chart.
Consider an example in which system impedance Zo is 50 Ω, and the load impedance
is ZL = 95 + j55 Ω. This load impedance is normalized to
ZL
Z= 
Zo

[4.6]

95 + j55 Ω
= 
50 Ω

[4.7]

= 1.9 + j1.1

[4.8]

An impedance radius is constructed by drawing a line from the point represented by the normalized load impedance, 1.9 + j1.1, to the point represented by the
normalized system impedance (1.0) in the center of the chart. A circle is constructed from this radius, and is called the VSWR circle.
Admittance is the reciprocal of impedance, so it is found from
1
Y= 
Z

[4.9]

Because impedances in transmission lines are rarely pure resistive, but rather
contain a reactive component also, impedances are expressed by complex notation:
Z = R ± jX

[4.10]

Chap04_Carr

4/10/01

1:33 PM

Page 101

Smith chart components 101

A

4-4A Constant inductive reactance lines. (Courtesy of Kay Elementrics)

Chap04_Carr

4/10/01

1:33 PM

Page 102

102 The Smith chart

A

4-4B Constant capacitive reactance lines. (Courtesy of Kay Elementrics)

Chap04_Carr

4/10/01

1:33 PM

Page 103

Smith chart components 103

A

B

C

D

E

F

G

4-4C Angle of transmission coefficient circle. (Courtesy of Kay Elementrics)

Chap04_Carr

4/10/01

1:33 PM

Page 104

104 The Smith chart

Z  1.9
VSWR circle

Impedance radius

Y  0.39  j0.23

4-4D VSWR circles. (Courtesy of Kay Elementrics)

j1.1

Chap04_Carr

4/10/01

1:33 PM

Page 105

Smith chart components 105
where
Z is the complex impedance
R is the resistive component
X is the reactive component
In order to find the complex admittance, take the reciprocal of the complex impedance by multiplying the simple reciprocal by the complex conjugate of the impedance. For example, when the normalized impedance is 1.9 + j1.1, the normalized
admittance will be:
1
Y= 
[4.11]
Z
1
1.9 – j1.1
=  × 
1.9 + j1.1
1.9 – j1.1

[4.12]

1.9 – j1.1
= 
3.6 + 1.2

[4.13]

1.9 – j1.1
=  = 0.39 – j0.23
4.8

[4.14]

One of the delights of the Smith chart is that this calculation is reduced to a
quick graphical interpretation! Simply extend the impedance radius through the 1.0
center point until it intersects the VSWR circle again. This point of intersection represents the normalized admittance of the load.

Outer circle parameters
The standard Smith chart shown in Fig. 4-4C contains three concentric calibrated
circles on the outer perimeter of the chart. Circle A has already been covered and it
is the pure reactance circle. The other two circles define the wavelength distance
(B) relative to either the load or generator end of the transmission line, and either
the transmission or reflection coefficient angle in degrees (C).
There are two scales on the wavelength circle (B in Fig 4-4C), and both have
their zero origin on the left-hand extreme of the pure resistance line. Both scales
represent one-half wavelength for one entire revolution, and are calibrated from
0 through 0.50 such that these two points are identical with each other on the circle.
In other words, starting at the zero point and travelling 360° around the circle brings
one back to zero, which represents one-half wavelength, or 0.5 λ.
Although both wavelength scales are of the same magnitude (0 – 0.50), they are
opposite in direction. The outer scale is calibrated clockwise and it represents wavelengths toward the generator; the inner scale is calibrated counterclockwise and
represents wavelengths toward the load. These two scales are complementary at
all points. Thus, 0.12 on the outer scale corresponds to (0.50 – 0.12) or 0.38 on the
inner scale.

Chap04_Carr

4/10/01

1:33 PM

Page 106

106 The Smith chart
The angle of transmission coefficient and angle of reflection coefficient
scales are shown in circle C in Fig. 4-4C. These scales are the relative phase angle between reflected and incident waves. Recall from transmission line theory (see Chap. 3),
that a short circuit at the load end of the line reflects the signal back toward the generator 180° out of phase with the incident signal; an open line (i.e., infinite impedance) reflects the signal back to the generator in phase (i.e., 0°) with the incident
signal. These facts are shown on the Smith chart by the fact that both scales start at
0° on the right-hand end of the pure resistance line, which corresponds to an infinite
resistance, and it goes halfway around the circle to 180° at the 0 end of the pure resistance line. Note that the upper half-circle is calibrated 0 to +180°, and the bottom
half-circle is calibrated 0 to –180°, reflecting indictive or capacitive reactance situations, respectively.

Radially scaled parameters
There are six scales laid out on five lines (D through G in Fig. 4-4C and in expanded
form in Fig. 4-5) at the bottom of the Smith chart. These scales are called the radially scaled parameters—and they are both very important, and often overlooked.
With these scales, we can determine such factors as VSWR (both as a ratio and in
decibels), return loss in decibels, voltage or current reflection coefficient, and the
power reflection coefficient.
The reflection coefficient Γ is defined as the ratio of the reflected signal to the
incident signal. For voltage or current:
Eref
Γ= 
Einc

[4.15]

Iref
Γ= 
Iinc

[4.16]

and

Power is proportional to the square of voltage or current, so:
Ppwr = Γ 2

[4.17]

Pref
Γpwr = 
Pinc

[4.18]

or

Example 10 W of microwave RF power is applied to a lossless transmission
line, of which 2.8 W is reflected from the mismatched load. Calculate the reflection coefficient.
Pref
Γpwr = 
[4.19]
Pinc

Page 107

A

4-5 Radially scaled parameters.

Smith chart components 107

B

1:33 PM

D

4/10/01

C

Chap04_Carr

Chap04_Carr

4/10/01

1:33 PM

Page 108

108 The Smith chart
2.8 W
Γpwr = 
10 W

[4.20]

= 0.28

[4.21]

The voltage reflection coefficient Γ is found by taking the square root of the
power reflection coefficient, so in this example it is equal to 0.529. These points are
plotted at A and B in Fig. 4-5.
Standing wave ratio (SWR) can be defined in terms of reflection coefficient:
1+Γ
VSWR = 
1–Γ
or

or, in our example,

1 + Γ

pwr

VSWR = 1 – Γ


pwr

[4.22]

[4.23]

1 + 0
.2
8

VSWR = 
1 – 0
.2
8


[4.24]

1 + 0.529
= 
1 – 0.529

[4.25]

1.529
=  = 3.25:1
0.471

[4.26]

or, in decibel form,
VSWRdB = 20 log (VSWR)

[4.27]

= 20 log (20)

[4.28]

= (20) (0.510) = 10.2 dB

[4.29]

These points are plotted at C in Fig. 4-5. Shortly, you will work an example to
show how these factors are calculated in a transmission line problem from a known
complex load impedance.
Transmission loss is a measure of the one-way loss of power in a transmission
line because of reflection from the load. Return loss represents the two-way loss, so
it is exactly twice the transmission loss. Return loss is found from
Lossret = 10 log (Γpwr )

[4.30]

and, for our example in which Γpwr = 0.28,
Lossret = 10 log (0.28)
= (10) (–0.553) = –5.53 dB

[4.31]
[4.32]

Chap04_Carr

4/10/01

1:33 PM

Page 109

Smith chart applications 109
This point is shown as D in Fig. 4-5.
The transmission loss coefficient can be calculated from
1 + Γpwr
TLC = 
1 – Γpwr

[4.33]

1 + (0.28)
TLC = 
1 – (0.28)

[4.34]

1.28
=  = 1.78
0.72

[4.35]

or, for our example,

The TLC is a correction factor that is used to calculate the attenuation caused
by mismatched impedance in a lossy, as opposed to the ideal “lossless,” line. The
TLC is found from laying out the impedance radius on the loss coefficient scale on
the radially scaled parameters at the bottom of the chart.

Smith chart applications
One of the best ways to demonstrate the usefulness of the Smith chart is by practical example. The following sections look at two general cases: transmission line
problems and stub matching systems.

Transmission line problems
Figure 4-6 shows a 50-Ω transmission line connected to a complex load impedance
ZL of 36 + j40 Ω. The transmission line has a velocity factor v of 0.80, which means
that the wave propagates along the line at 8⁄10 the speed of light (c = 300,000,000 m/s).
The length of the transmission line is 28 cm. The generator Vin is operated at a frequency of 4.5 GHz and produces a power output of 1.5 W. See what you can glean
from the Smith chart (Fig. 4-7).
First, normalize the load impedance. This is done by dividing the load impedance by the systems impedance (in this case, Zo = 50 Ω):
36 + j40 Ω
Z = 
50 Ω

[4.36]

= 0.72 + j0.8

[4.37]

The resistive component of impedance Z is located along the 0.72 pure resistance
circle (see Fig. 4-7). Similarly, the reactive component of impedance Z is located by
traversing the 0.72 constant resistance circle until the +j0.8 constant reactance circle is intersected. This point graphically represents the normalized load impedance
Z = 0.72 + j0.80. A VSWR circle is constructed with an impedance radius equal to the
line between 1.0 (in the center of the chart) and the 0.72 + j0.8 point.

Chap04_Carr

4/10/01

1:33 PM

Page 110

110 The Smith chart

I

Zo =50 
R  36 
ZL

ZS =50 

  0.8
I  28 cm
f  4.5 GHz  4.5  109 Hz
Zo  50 
ZS  50 
ZL  36
j40
P  1.5 W

Vin
F  4.5 GHz

4-6 Transmission line and load circuit.

At a frequency of 4.5 GHz, the length of a wave propagating in the transmission
line, assuming a velocity factor of 0.80, is
cv
λline = 
FHz

[4.38]

(3 × 108 m/s) (0.80)
= 
4.5 × 109 Hz

[4.39]

2.4 × 108 m/s
= 
4.5 × 109 Hz

[4.40]

100 cm
= 0.053 m ×  = 5.3 cm
m

[4.41]

One wavelength is 5.3 cm, so a half-wavelength is 5.3 cm/2, or 2.65 cm. The
28-cm line is 28 cm/5.3 cm, or 5.28 wavelengths long. A line drawn from the center
(1.0) to the load impedance is extended to the outer circle, and it intersects the circle at 0.1325. Because one complete revolution around this circle represents onehalf wavelength, 5.28 wavelengths from this point represents 10 revolutions plus
0.28 more. The residual 0.28 wavelengths is added to 0.1325 to form a value of
(0.1325 + 0.28), or 0.413. The point 0.413 is located on the circle, and is marked. A
line is then drawn from 0.413 to the center of the circle, and it intersects the VSWR
circle at 0.49 – j0.49, which represents the input impedance Zin looking into the line.
To find the actual impedance represented by the normalized input impedance,
you have to “denormalize” the Smith chart impedance by multiplying the result by Zo:

X

j40 

4/10/01

1:33 PM

Page 111

Smith chart applications 111

Z  0.72

j0.8

Impedance radius

Chap04_Carr

VSWR circle

Zin  0.49  j0.49
Y  0.62  j0.69

0.413

2.6

1.5

 1.05

7 dB
0.2
0.44

4-7 Solution to example. (Courtesy of Kay Elementrics)

Chap04_Carr

4/10/01

1:33 PM

Page 112

112 The Smith chart
Zin = (0.49 – j0.49) (50 Ω)
= 24.5 – j24.5 Ω

[4.42]
[4.43]

It is this impedance that must be matched at the generator by a conjugate matching network.
The admittance represented by the load impedance is the reciprocal of the load
impedance, and is found by extending the impedance radius through the center of
the VSWR circle until it intersects the circle again. This point is found, and represents the admittance Y = 0.62 – j0.69. Confirming the solution mathematically:
1
Y= 
Z

[4.44]

0.72 – j0.80
1
=  × 
0.72 + j0.80
0.72 – j0.80

[4.45]

0.72 – j0.80
=  = 0.62 – j0.69
1.16

[4.46]

The VSWR if found by transferring the “impedance radius” of the VSWR circle to
the radial scales below. The radius (0.72 – 0.8) is laid out on the VSWR scale (topmost of the radially scaled parameters) with a pair of dividers from the center mark,
and we find that the VSWR is approximately 2.6:1. The decibel form of VSWR is 8.3
dB (next scale down from VSWR), and this is confirmed by
VSWRdB = 20 log (VSWR)

[4.47]

= (20) log (2.7)

[4.48]

= (20) (0.431) = 8.3 dB

[4.49]

The transmission loss coefficient is found in a manner similar to the VSWR, using the radially scaled parameter scales. In practice, once you have found the VSWR
you need only drop a perpendicular line from the 2.6:1 VSWR line across the other
scales. In this case, the line intersects the voltage reflection coefficient at 0.44. The
power reflection coefficient Γpwr is found from the scale, and is equal to Γ2. The perpendicular line intersects the power reflection coefficient line at 0.20.
The angle of reflection coefficient is found from the outer circles of the Smith
chart. The line from the center to the load impedance (Z = 0.72 + j0.8) is extended
to the angle of reflection coefficient in degrees circle, and intersects it at approximately 84°. The reflection coefficient is therefore 0.44/84°.
The transmission loss coefficient (TLC) is found from the radially scaled parameter scales also. In this case, the impedance radius is laid out on the loss coefficient scale, where it is found to be 1.5. This value is confirmed from:
1 + Γpwr
TLC = 
1 – Γpwr

[4.50]

Chap04_Carr

4/10/01

1:33 PM

Page 113

Smith chart applications 113
1 + (0.20)
= 
1 – (0.21)

[4.51]

1.20
=  = 1.5
0.79

[4.52]

The return loss is also found by dropping the perpendicular from the VSWR
point to the RET’N LOSS, dB line, and the value is found to be approximately 7 dB,
which is confirmed by
Lossret = 10 log (Γpwr ) dB

[4.53]

= 10 log (0.21) dB

[4.54]

= (10) (–0.677) dB

[4.55]

= 6.77 dB = –6.9897 dB

[4.56]

The reflection loss is the amount of RF power reflected back down the transmission line from the load. The difference between incident power supplied by the
generator (1.5 W in this example), Pinc – Pref = Pabs and the reflected power, is the absorbed power (Pa ); or in the case of an antenna, the radiated power. The reflection
loss is found graphically by dropping a perpendicular from the TLC point (or by laying out the impedance radius on the REFL. LOSS, dB scale), and in this example
(Fig. 4-7) is –1.05 dB. You can check the calculations:
The return loss is –7 dB, so
–7 dB = 10 log

 
Pref

Pinc

[4.57]



Pref
–7 = 10 log 
1.5 watts



Pref
–7
 = log 
10
1.5 watts





[4.58]

[4.59]

Pref
10( 7/10) = 
1.5 W

[4.60]

Pref
0.2 = 
1.5 W

[4.61]

(0.2)(1.5 W) = Pref

[4.62]

0.3 W = Pref

[4.63]

Chap04_Carr

4/10/01

1:33 PM

Page 114

114 The Smith chart
The power absorbed by the load (Pa ) is the difference between incident power
Pinc and reflected power Pref . If 0.3 W is reflected, then that means the absorbed
power is (1.5 – 0.3), or 1.2 W.
The reflection loss is –1.05 dB, and can be checked from:

 

Pa
–1.05 dB = 10 log 
Pinc



Pa
–1.05
 = log 
10
1.5 W

[4.64]



[4.65]

Pa
10(-1.05/10) = 
1.5 W

[4.66]

Pa
0.785 = 
1.5 W

[4.67]

(1.5 W) × (0.785) = Pa

[4.68]

1.2 W = Pa

[4.69]

Now check what you have learned from the Smith chart. Recall that 1.5 W of 4.5GHz microwave RF signal was input to a 50-Ω transmission line that was 28 cm long.
The load connected to the transmission line has an impedance of 36 + j40. From the
Smith chart:
Admittance (load)
VSWR
VSWR (dB):
Reflection coefficient (E)
Reflection coefficient (P)
Reflection coefficient angle
Return loss
Reflection loss
Transmission loss coefficient

0.62 – j0.69
2.6:1
8.3 dB
0.44
0.2
84 degrees
–7 dB
–1.05 dB
1.5

Note that in all cases the mathematical interpretation corresponds to the graphical interpretation of the problem, within the limits of accuracy of the graphical
method.

Stub matching systems
A properly designed matching system will provide a conjugate match to a complex
impedance. Some sort of matching system or network is needed any time the load
impedance ZL is not equal to the characteristic impedance Zo of the transmission
line. In a transmission line system, it is possible to use a shorted stub connected in

Chap04_Carr

4/10/01

1:33 PM

Page 115

Smith chart applications 115
parallel with the line, at a critical distance back from the mismatched load, in order
to effect a match. The stub is merely a section of transmission line that is shorted at
the end not connected to the main transmission line. The reactance (hence also susceptance) of a shorted line can vary from –λ to +λ, depending upon length, so you
can use a line of critical length L2 to cancel the reactive component of the load impedance. Because the stub is connected in parallel with the line it is a bit easier to
work with admittance parameters, rather than impedance.
Consider the example of Fig. 4-8, in which the load impedance is Z = 100 + j60,
which is normalized to 2.0 + j1.2. This impedance is plotted on the Smith chart in
Fig. 4-9, and a VSWR circle is constructed. The admittance is found on the chart at
point Y = 0.37 – j0.22.
In order to provide a properly designed matching stub, you need to find two
lengths. L1 is the length (relative to wavelength) from the load toward the generator
(see L1 in Fig. 4-8); L2 is the length of the stub itself.
The first step in finding a solution to the problem is to find the points where the
unit conductance line (1.0 at the chart center) intersects the VSWR circle; there are
two such points shown in Fig. 4-9: 1.0 + j1.1 and 1.0 – j1.1. Select one of these
(choose 1.0 + j1.1) and extend a line from the center 1.0 point through the 1.0 + j1.1
point to the outer circle (WAVELENGTHS TOWARD GENERATOR). Similarly, a
line is drawn from the center through the admittance point 0.37 – 0.22 to the outer
circle. These two lines intersect the outer circle at the points 0.165 and 0.461. The
distance of the stub back toward the generator is found from:
L1 = 0.165 + (0.500 – 0.461) λ

Transmission line

ZS  50 

[4.70]

L1

Zo  50 

ZL

Vin

Matching stub
Conditions:
ZS  50 
Zo  50 
ZL  100
j60

4-8 Matching stub length and position.

L2

Chap04_Carr

4/10/01

1:33 PM

Page 116

116 The Smith chart

0.165

Y  1.0

j1.1

Y  00

G  1.0

Y  0.37  j0.22

Y  0 j1.1
0.461

Y  1.0 j1.1
0.368

4-9 Solution to problem. (Courtesy of Kay Elementrics)

0.250

Chap04_Carr

4/10/01

1:33 PM

Page 117

Smith chart applications 117
= 0.165 + 0.039 λ

[4.71]

= 0.204 λ

[4.72]

The next step is to find the length of the stub required. This is done by finding
two points on the Smith chart. First, locate the point where admittance is infinite
(far right side of the pure conductance line); second, locate the point where the admittance is 0 – j1.1. (Note that the susceptance portion is the same as that found
where the unit conductance circle crossed the VSWR circle.) Because the conductance component of this new point is 0, the point will lay on the –j1.1 circle at the intersection with the outer circle. Now draw lines from the center of the chart through
each of these points to the outer circle. These lines intersect the outer circle at 0.368
and 0.250. The length of the stub is found from
L2 = (0.368 – 0.250)λ
= 0.118λ

[4.73]
[4.74]

From this analysis you can see that the impedance, Z = 100 + j60, can be
matched by placing a stub of a length 0.118λ at a distance 0.204λ back from the load.

The Smith chart in lossy circuits
Thus far, you have dealt with situations in which loss is either zero (i.e., ideal transmission lines), or so small as to be negligible. In situations where there is appreciable loss in the circuit or line, however, you see a slightly modified situation. The
VSWR circle, in that case, is actually a spiral, rather than a circle.
Figure 4-10 shows a typical situation. Assume that the transmission line is
0.60λ long, and is connected to a normalized load impedance of Z = 1.2 + j1.2. An
“ideal” VSWR circle is constructed on the impedance radius represented by 1.2 +
j1.2. A line (A) is drawn, from the point where this circle intersects the pure resistance baseline (B), perpendicularly to the ATTEN, 1 dB/MAJ. DIV. line on the radially scaled parameters. A distance representing the loss (3 dB) is stepped off on
this scale. A second perpendicular line is drawn, from the –3 dB point, back to the
pure resistance line (C). The point where line C intersects the pure resistance line
becomes the radius for a new circle that contains the actual input impedance of the
line. The length of the line is 0.60λ, so you must step back (0.60 – 0.50)λ or 0.1λ.
This point is located on the WAVELENGTHS TOWARD GENERATOR outer circle.
A line is drawn from this point to the 1.0 center point. The point where this new line
intersects the new circle is the actual input impedance (Zin ).The intersection
occurs at 0.76 + j0.4, which (when denormalized) represents an input impedance
of 38 + j20 .

Frequency on the Smith chart
A complex network may contain resistance, inductive reactance, and capacitive reactance components. Because the reactance component of such impedances is a function of frequency, the network or component tends to also be frequency-sensitive.

Chap04_Carr

4/10/01

1:33 PM

Page 118

118 The Smith chart

0.1

Zin  0.76

j0.4
Z  1.2

j1.2

VSWR
circle

D

B

A
C

3 dB

4-10 Solution. (Courtesy of Kay Elementrics)

Chap04_Carr

4/10/01

1:34 PM

Page 119

Smith chart applications 119
You can use the Smith chart to plot the performance of such a network with respect
to various frequencies. Consider the load impedance connected to a 50-Ω transmission line in Fig. 4-11. In this case, the resistance is in series with a 2.2-pF capacitor,
which will exhibit a different reactance at each frequency. The impedance of this network is
1
Z=R–j 
[4.75]
ωC
or
1
[4.76]
Z = 50 – j 
2πFC









And, in normalized form,
j
Z' = 1.0 – 
(2 π F C) × 50

[4.77]

Zo

Zo  50
j0
ZS  50
j0
ZL  50  jXC

ZS

Vin

XC 

R  50 
ZL

1
72.3

2FC
FGHz

XC1 XC /Zo  XC /50

Freq.
(GHz)

XC

1

j72.3 j1.45

2

j36.2 j0.72

3

j24.1 j0.48

4

j18

5
6

j0.36

j14.5 j0.29
j12 j0.24

4-11 Load and source impedance transmission line circuit.

C  2.2 pF

Chap04_Carr

4/10/01

1:34 PM

Page 120

120 The Smith chart

j0.24
j0.48

j0.29
j0.36

j0.72
j1.45

4-12 Solution. (Courtesy of Kay Elementrics)

Chap04_Carr

4/10/01

1:34 PM

Page 121

Smith chart applications 121
j
= 1.0 – 
6.9 × 10–10 F

[4.78]

j × 7.23 × 1010
= 1.0 – 
F

[4.79]

j72.3
Z' = 1.0 – 
FGHz

[4.80]

Or, converted to gigahertz,

The normalized impedances for the sweep of frequencies from 1 to 6 GHz are
therefore
Z = 1.0 – j1.45
[4.81]
Z = 1.0 – j0.72

[4.82]

Z = 1.0 – j0.48

[4.83]

Z = 1.0 – j0.36

[4.84]

Z = 1.0 – j0.29

[4.85]

Z = 1.0 – j0.24

[4.86]

These points are plotted on the Smith chart in Fig. 4-12. For complex networks,
in which both inductive and capacitive reactance exist, take the difference between
the two reactances (i.e., X = XL – XC ).

This page intentionally left blank

5

CHAPTER

Fundamentals
of radio antennas
AN UNFORTUNATE OVERSIGHT IN MANY BOOKS ON RADIO ANTENNAS IS A LACK OF

coverage on the most basic fundamentals of antenna theory. Most books, including
the first draft of this one, start with a discussion of dipoles, but overlook that certain
physical mechanisms are at work. An antenna is basically a transducer that converts
electrical alternating current oscillations at a radio frequency to an electromagnetic
wave of the same frequency. This chapter looks at the physics of how that job is accomplished.
The material in this chapter was adapted from a U.S. Army training manual on
antennas and radio propagation. Although unfortunately no longer in print, the manual contained the best coverage of basics the author of this book could find. Given
that U.S. government publications are not protected by copyright, this information
can be brought to you in full.

Antenna fundamentals
The electric and magnetic fields radiated from an antenna form the electromagnetic
field, and this field is responsible for the transmission and reception of electromagnetic energy through free space. An antenna, however, is also part of the electrical
circuit of a transmitter (or a receiver); because of its distributed constants, it acts as
a circuit containing inductance, capacitance, and resistance. Therefore, it can be expected to display definite voltage and current relationships in respect to a given input. A current through it produces a magnetic field, and a charge on it produces an
electrostatic field. These two fields taken together form the induction field. To gain
a better understanding of antenna theory, a review of the basic electrical concepts of
voltage and electric field and of current and magnetic field is necessary.

Copyright 2001 - the McGraw-Hill Companies

123

Chap05_Carr

4/10/01

1:30 PM

Page 124

124 Fundamentals of radio antennas

Voltage and electric field
When a capacitor is connected across a source of voltage, such as a battery (Fig.
5-1), it is charged some amount, depending on the voltage and the value of capacitance. Because of the emf (electromotive force) of the battery, negative charges
flow to the lower plate, leaving the upper plate positively charged. Accompanying
the accumulation of charge is the building up of the electric field. The flux lines are
directed from the positive to the negative charges and at right angles to the plates.
If the two plates of the capacitor are spread farther apart, the electric field
must curve to meet the plates at right angles (Fig. 5-2). The straight lines in A
become arcs in B, and approximately semicircles in C, where the plates are in a
straight line. Instead of flat metal plates, as in the capacitor, the two elements can
take the form of metal rods or wires. The three-dimensional view in Fig. 5-3 depicts the electric field more accurately. In A of Fig. 5-3, the wires are approximately 30° apart, and the flux lines are projected radially from the positively
charged wire to the negatively charged wire. In B of Fig. 5-3, the two wires lie in a
straight line, and the flux lines form a pattern similar to the lines of longitude
around the earth. To bring out the picture more clearly, only the lines in one plane
are given.
Assume that the sphere marked E in Fig. 5-3B is a transmitter supplying RF energy. The two wires then can serve as the antenna for the transmitter. RF energy is
radiated from the antenna and charges move back and forth along the wires, alternately compressing and expanding the flux lines of the electric field. The reversals
in polarity of the transmitter signal also reverse the direction of the electric field.
Capacitor













 

5-1 Charges on plates of a capacitor.





Chap05_Carr

4/10/01

1:31 PM

Page 125

Antenna fundamentals 125

E

A



B

E

5-2 Electric field between plates at various angles.



C

E






A

B

5-3 Electric field between wires at various angles.

When a charge is put on the plates of a capacitor by means of a battery, an electric field is set up between its plates. The flow of charge from source to capacitor
ceases when the capacitor is fully charged, and the capacitor is said to be charged to
a voltage equal, and of opposite polarity, to that of the source. The charged capacitor

Chap05_Carr

4/10/01

1:31 PM

Page 126

126 Fundamentals of radio antennas
can be used as a source of emf since it stores energy in the form of an electric field.
This is the same as saying that an electric field indicates voltage. The presence of
an electric field about an antenna also indicates voltage. Since the polarity, and the
amount of charge, depend on the nature of the transmitter output, the antenna voltage also depends on the energy source. For example, if a battery constitutes the
source, the antenna charges to a voltage equal and opposite to that of the battery. If
RF energy is supplied to a half-wave antenna, the voltage across the antenna lags the
current by 90°. The half-wave antenna acts as if it was a capacitor, and it can be
described as being capacitive.

Current and magnetic field
A moving charge along a conductor constitutes a current and produces a magnetic
field around the conductor. Therefore, the flow of charge along an antenna also will
be accompanied by a magnetic field. The intensity of this field is directly proportional to the flow of charge. When the antenna is uncharged, the current flow is maximum, since there is no opposing electric field. Because of this current flow, a charge
accumulates on the antenna, and an electric field builds up in increasing opposition
to the emf of the source. The current flow decreases and when the antenna is fully
charged, the current no longer flows.
The magnetic field in the space around a current-carrying device has a specific
configuration, with the magnetic flux lines drawn according to a definite rule (Fig.
5-4). Whereas, in the electric field, the electric lines are drawn from a positive
charge to a negative charge, in the magnetic field, the flux lines are drawn according
to the left-hand rule. The direction of current flow is upward along both halves of
the antenna. The lines of magnetic flux form concentric loops that are perpendicular to the direction of current flow. The arrowheads on the loops indicate the direction of the field. If the thumb of the left hand is extended in the direction of current
flow and the fingers are clenched, then the rough circles formed by the fingers indicate the direction of the magnetic field. This is the left-hand rule, or convention,
which is used to determine the direction of the magnetic field.

Combined electric and magnetic fields
When RF energy from a transmitter is supplied to an antenna, the effects of charge,
voltage, current, and the electric and magnetic fields are taking place simultaneously. These effects (Fig. 5-5) have definite time and space relationships to each
other. If a half-wave antenna is used, the relations between charge and current flow
can be predicted, because of the capacitive nature of this antenna. The voltage will
lag the current by 90°, and the electric and magnetic fields will be 90° out of phase.
With no electric field present (no charge), the current flow is unimpeded, and the
magnetic field is maximum. As charge accumulates on the antenna, the electric field
builds up in opposition to current flow and the magnetic field decreases in intensity.
When the electric field reaches its maximum strength, the magnetic field has decayed to zero.
A reversal in polarity of the source reverses the direction of current flow as well
as the polarity of the magnetic field, and the electric field aids the flow of current by

Chap05_Carr

4/10/01

1:31 PM

Page 127

Antenna fundamentals 127
Direction of
current flow

5-4 Magnetic field about a
half-wave antenna
(left-hand rule).

Direction of magnetic
field

Left hand

discharging. The magnetic field builds up to a maximum, and the electric field disappears as the charge is dissipated. The following half-cycle is a repetition of the first
half-cycle, but in the reverse direction. This process continues as long as energy is
supplied to the antenna. The fluctuating electric and magnetic fields combine to
form the induction field, in which the electric and magnetic flux maximum intensities occur 90° apart in time, or in time quadrature. Physically, they occur at right
angles to each other, or in space quadrature. To sum up, the electric and magnetic
fields about the antenna are in space and time quadrature.

Standing waves
Assume that it is possible to have a wire conductor with one end extending infinitely,
with an RF transmitter connected to this wire. When the transmitter is turned on, an
RF current in the form of sine waves of RF energy moves down the wire. These
waves of energy are called traveling waves. The resistance of the conductor gradually diminishes the amplitude of the waves, but they continue to travel so long as the
line does not come to an end.
The antenna, however, has some finite length. Therefore, the traveling waves
are halted when they reach the end of the conductor. Assume that the RF transmitter is turned on just long enough to allow one sine wave of energy to get on the line
(Fig. 5-6A). This traveling wave is moving down the antenna toward the end. When
the wave reaches the end of the conductor, the current path is broken abruptly. With
the stoppage of current flow, the magnetic field collapses. A voltage is induced at the
end of the conductor that causes current to flow back toward the source, as in Fig.
5-6B. The wave is reflected back to the source, and, if a continual succession of

Chap05_Carr

4/10/01

1:31 PM

Page 128

128 Fundamentals of radio antennas
H

E

H



E

H

F



I



 I

I

Electric field
intensity

E


Downward moving
flux lines
0
Upward moving
flux lines

Magnetic field
intensity

H

Time
Clockwise
flux lines
0
Counterclockwise
flux
lines
5-5 Electric and magnetic fields 90° out of phase.

waves is sent down the line, waves will be reflected in the same continual pattern.
The wave moving from the transmitter toward the end is called the incident wave,
and its reflection is called the reflected wave.
A continuous flow of incident waves results in a continuous flow of reflected
waves. Because there is only one conductor, the two waves must pass each other.
Electrically, the only current that actually flows is the resultant of both of these
waves. The waves can reinforce or cancel each other as they move.
When they reinforce, the resultant wave is maximum; when they cancel, the resultant wave is minimum. In a conductor that has a finite length, such as an antenna,
the points at which the maxima and minima of the resultant wave occur (Fig. 5-6C)
are stationary. In other words, the maximum and minimum points stand still, although both the incident and reflected waves are moving. The resultant wave stands
still on the line, only its amplitude being subject to change. Because of this effect, the
resultant is referred to as a standing wave.
The development of the standing wave on an antenna by actual addition of the
traveling waves is illustrated in Fig. 5-7. At the instant pictured in A, the incident and
reflected waves just coincide. The result is a standing wave having twice the amplitude of either traveling wave. In B, the waves move apart in opposite directions, and

Chap05_Carr

4/10/01

1:31 PM

Page 129

Antenna fundamentals 129
Incident
wave

A

Reflected
wave

B

C
5-6 Traveling waves on an antenna and a typical resultant wave.

the amplitude of the resultant decreases, but the points of maximum and minimum
do not move.
When the traveling waves have moved to a position of 180° phase difference, the
resultant is zero along the entire length of the antenna, as shown in C. At this instant,
there can be no current flow in the antenna. The continuing movement of the traveling waves, shown in D, builds up a resultant in a direction opposite to that in A. The
in-phase condition of the traveling waves results in a standing wave, in E, equal in
amplitude, but 180° out of phase with the standing wave in A.
If the progressive pictures of the standing wave are assembled on one set of axes,
the result is as in Fig. 5-8. The net effect of the incident and reflected waves is apparent. The curves are lettered with reference to Fig. 5-7. As the traveling waves move
past each other, the standing wave changes only its amplitude. The fixed minimum
points are called nodes, and the curves representing the amplitude are called loops.
The concept of the standing wave can be applied to the half-wave antenna with
reference to either current or voltage distribution at any instant. This application is
possible because there are traveling waves of both voltage and current. Because voltage and current are out of phase on the half-wave antenna, the standing waves also
are found to be out of phase.

Chap05_Carr

4/10/01

1:31 PM

Page 130

130 Fundamentals of radio antennas
Resultant

A

Resultant

B

Resultant

C

Resultant

D

Resultant

E

5-7 Development of standing wave from traveling wave.

Chap05_Carr

4/10/01

1:31 PM

Page 131

Antenna fundamentals 131
Loops
A

Node
B

5-8 Standing waves.

C
Node
D
Loops
E

Voltage and current distribution on half-wave antenna
When an RF transmitter is feeding a half-wave antenna, positive and negative charges
move back and forth along the antenna (Figs. 5-9 and 5-10). The first picture shows
the position of the charges at some arbitrary time, T0. The RF charges being observed
are at the ends of the antenna, and there is a maximum difference in potential between the ends, A and B. The remaining illustrations show the instantaneous positions
of the charges at regular intervals of 22.5° throughout a complete cycle.
To the right of each instantaneous position of the charges are curves representing the current and voltage at that particular time for any point on the antenna.
For example, at time T0, the positive and negative charges are at points A and B on
the antenna. The voltage between these points represents a maximum difference of
potential. The current, being 90° out of phase in respect to the voltage, is everywhere zero. These distribution curves are standing waves derived in the same manner as those covered in the previous paragraph.
The next illustration shows the position of the charges at time T1. The standing
wave of current is a relative maximum at the center of the antenna. This current loop
has nodes that remain at the ends of the antenna, and it is, therefore, 90° out of
phase with the standing wave of voltage.
At T2 and T3, the charges move closer together, and the standing wave of voltage
slowly decreases in amplitude. Conversely, the current loop increases in magnitude.
When the charges meet after 90° of the RF cycle (T4), the effect is that of having the
positive and negative charges cancel. The voltage loop accordingly is zero everywhere on the antenna, and the current loop rises to its maximum value, unimpeded
by any charge on the antenna.
At time T5, the charges have passed each other, each charge having moved past
the center point of the antenna. The polarity of the voltage loops is reversed, and
they build up in the opposite direction, keeping the node always at the center point
of the antenna. The reversal of polarity is shown in the charge positions at T3, T4, and

Chap05_Carr

4/10/01

1:31 PM

Page 132

132 Fundamentals of radio antennas
Distribution curves
Voltage
Movement of points of charge

A

C

A

Current
B

A

B



T0



T1
22.5°

0
T
I

M
E



0

0





0

0





0

0






0

0





0

0





0

0





0

0





0

0





0

22.5°



T2
45°

45°



T3
67.5°

67.5°



T4
90°

90°



T5

112.5°
112.5°



T6

135°
135°



T7

157.5°
157.5°
T8


180°
180°

5-9 Voltage and current distribution in terms of positive and negative charges.

B

Chap05_Carr

4/10/01

1:31 PM

Page 133

Antenna fundamentals 133

Movement of points of charge
B

C

A
T8



Voltage

T
I
M
E

A

Current
B

0

0





0

0





0

0





0

0





0

0





0

0





0

0





0

0





0

0





A

180°
180°



T9

202.5°
202.5°



T10

225°
225°



T11

247.5°
247.5°



T12

270°
270°



T13

292.5°
292.5°



T14

315°
315°



T15
337.5°
337.5°



T16
360°
360°

5-10 Voltage and current distribution in terms of positive and negative charges.

Chap05_Carr

4/10/01

1:31 PM

Page 134

134 Fundamentals of radio antennas
T5. The separation of the charges also is accompanied by a decrease in the amplitude
of the current loop.
From T5 to T8, the charges move out to the ends of the antenna. During this time,
the voltage loops increase and the current loops decrease in amplitude. At time T8,
which occurs 180° after T0 in the RF cycle, the charges have moved to opposite ends
of the antenna. Compare the picture in T0 to the picture in T8. It is seen that the negative charge is now at point A and the positive charge at point B. Because the positions of the charges have been reversed from T0 to T8, the voltage loops in T8 are 180°
out of phase, compared with the loops in T0.
From T8 to T16 in Fig. 5-10, the movement of the charges is shown in the opposite direction, the current loop reaching a maximum at T12. When the entire RF cycle is completed at time T16, the charges have returned to the positions that they
occupied at T0. The distribution curves of voltage and current also are in their original conditions. The entire process then is repeated for each RF cycle.
Standing waves of voltage and current The distribution curves of the current
and voltage are standing waves. This means that they are the resultants obtained by
adding two traveling waves. The two traveling waves are associated with the positive
and negative charges. The wave caused by the negative charge can be called the incident wave and the wave caused by the positive charge the reflected wave. This,
however, is clearer when the concept of negative and positive charges is used.
The positive charge, taken at time T0 in Fig. 5-9, produces a traveling wave of
voltage, shown by the dashed line in Fig. 5-11A. The negative charge at the opposite
end of the antenna produces an identical traveling wave (dash-dot curve). These
two add together to produce the T0 voltage distribution curve, which is the resultant
wave of Fig. 5-9A. Both of these waveforms are identical, being the standing wave
of voltage at time T0. All of the following distribution curves of Fig. 5-11 are produced in the same manner. They are the standing wave resultants caused by the
traveling waves accompanying the charges.
In Fig. 5-11B, each of the traveling waves has moved 45°, the positive traveling
wave moving to the right and the negative traveling wave moving to the left. This
time corresponds to T2 in Fig. 5-9. The standing wave produced corresponds to the
voltage distribution curve at T2. The standing waves of current are produced in the
same manner. The current curves at D, E, and F of Fig. 5-11 correspond to times T0,
T2, and T4 of Fig. 5-9.
Standing waves of voltage In Fig. 5-12A, voltage standing waves occurring at
different times are brought together on one axis, AB, representing a half-wave antenna. Essentially, these are the same curves shown progressively in Figs. 5-9 and
5-10 as voltage distribution curves. They can be used to determine the voltage at any
point on the antenna, at any instant of time. For example, if it is desired to know the
variations of voltage occurring at point Y on the antenna over the RF cycle, the variations are graphed in respect to time, as shown in Fig. 5-12B. At T0, the voltage at Y
is maximum. From T0 through T3, the voltage decreases, passing through zero at T4.
The voltage builds up to a maximum in the opposite direction at T8, returning
through zero to its original position from T8 to T16.
Between T0 and T16, therefore, an entire sine-wave cycle, Y, is reproduced. This
is also true of any other point on the antenna, with the exception of the node at X.

Chap05_Carr

4/10/01

1:31 PM

Page 135

Antenna fundamentals 135

45°

90°

135°

180°

45°
B

A



90°

135°

180°
B

A0



A

45°

D

90°

135°

A

180°
B



90°

45°

135°

180° B

135°

180°
B

A0



B

45°

E

90°

135°

A

180°
B

90°

45°
A0





F

C
Voltage waves

Current waves

In A, B, and C
-------- Voltage wave due to point of charge
— -— Voltage wave due to point of  charge
——– Resultant voltage wave

In D, E, and F
-------- Current wave due to point of charge
— -— Current wave due to point of  charge
——– Resultant current wave

5-11 Standing waves of voltage and current.

Chap05_Carr

4/10/01

1:31 PM

Page 136

Time

136 Fundamentals of radio antennas
T0

T16

T2

T14

T3

T13

T4

T12

T5

T11

T6

T10

T8

T8

A

Y

X

B

Voltage distribution

Voltage

A

0

T0

T1

T2

T3 T4

T5

T6

T7

T8

T9

T10 T11

T12 T13 T14 T15 T16

Voltage at A
Voltage at Y

B
5-12 Standing waves of voltage at a point on the antenna.

The peak amplitude of the sine wave produced at any point depends on its position
on the antenna. The nearer the point is to either end, the greater its peak amplitude.
Standing waves of current The standing waves of current occurring at various times through the RF cycle are assembled on a single axis in Fig. 5-13. This axis,
AB, represents the half-wave antenna. If the current variations at point Y from T0 to
T16 are graphed in respect to time, the result is the sine wave in Fig. 5-13B. This is
true for any point along the antenna with the exception of the nodes at the ends. The
current has its greatest swing at X, the center of the antenna. Comparison of the
voltage variation curve (Fig. 5-12A) with the current variation curve (Fig. 5-13A)
shows the voltage curve leading the current curve by 90° at Y. This relation can be
expected on any half-wave device.

4/10/01

1:31 PM

Page 137

Antenna fundamentals 137
T4

T4

T2

T6

T1

T7

T
Time 0

T8

T16

T9

T15

T10

T14

T12

T12

A
Y

B

X

Current distribution

A

Current

Chap05_Carr

T0

T1 T2

T3

T4 T5

T6

T7 T8

T9 T10

T11 T12

T13

T14 T15

T16

Current at X
Current at Y

B
5-13 Standing waves of current at a point on the antenna.

Measurement of standing waves In Fig. 5-14, the standing waves of voltage
E and current I are indicated along the antenna. There are current nodes at A and B
and a voltage node at X. These standing waves are found on any half-wave antenna.
A meter that indicates the effective value (0.707 of peak) of the ac signal can be used
to measure the standing waves present on the half-wave antenna.

Velocity of propagation and antenna length
In free space, electromagnetic waves travel at a constant velocity of 300,000 km (or
approximately 186,000 mi) per second. The RF energy on an antenna, however,
moves at a velocity considerably less than that of the radiated energy in free space

Chap05_Carr

4/10/01

1:31 PM

Page 138

138 Fundamentals of radio antennas

I

E

.707

5-14 Standing waves measured
with a meter.

A

X

B

because the antenna has a dielectric constant greater than that of free space. Because
the dielectric constant of free space (air or vacuum) is approximately 1, a dielectric
constant greater than 1 retards electromagnetic-wave travel.
Because of the difference in velocity between the wave in free space and the
wave on the antenna, the physical length of the antenna no longer corresponds to
its electrical length. The antenna is a half-wavelength electrically, but somewhat
shorter than this physically. This is shown in the formula for the velocity of electromagnetic waves,
[5.1]
V = ƒλ
where V is the velocity, ƒ is the frequency, and λ is the wavelength. Since the frequency of the wave remains constant, a decrease in the velocity results in a decrease
in the wavelength. Therefore, the wave traveling in an antenna has a shorter wavelength than the same wave traveling in free space, and the physical length of the antenna can be shorter.
The actual difference between the physical length and the electrical length of the
antenna depends on several factors. A thin wire antenna, for example, has less effect
on wave velocity than an antenna with a large cross section. As the circumference of
the antenna increases, the wave velocity is lowered, as compared with its free-space
velocity. The effect of antenna circumference on wave velocity is illustrated in the
graph of Fig. 5-15.
Other factors are involved that lower wave velocity on the antenna. Stray capacitance, for example, increases the dielectric constant and lowers wave velocity. This capacitance can be caused by the line connecting the antenna to the transmitter, the
insulators used to give physical support to the antenna, or nearby objects made of
metallic or dielectric materials. The change in velocity resulting from stray capacitance
is called end effect because the ends of the antenna are made farther apart electrically
than they are physically. End effect is counteracted by making the physical length
about 5 percent shorter than the electrical length, as expressed in the formula

ƒ

492
L = 0.95 
468
=

[5.2]

ƒ

where L is the physical length in feet and ƒ is the frequency in megahertz. This formula is accurate for all practical purposes in determining the physical length of a
half-wavelength antenna at the operating frequency.

4/10/01

1:32 PM

Page 139

Antenna fundamentals 139
The capacitive end effect also slightly changes the standing waves of voltage and
current. When the standing waves are measured, it is found that the nodes have some
value and do not reach zero, because some current is necessary to charge the stray capacitance. The standing waves measured in Fig. 5-16 show the results of end effect.

5-15 Effect of antenna
circumference on wave
velocity.

Circumference wavelengths

Chap05_Carr

.01

.005

.002
.001
0 .2

.4

.6

.8

1.0

Wave velocity
Free-space velocity

2,500
ohms
(end)

Z

E
5-16 Impedance along half-wave
antenna.

73
ohms
(center)

I

/2

Chap05_Carr

4/10/01

1:32 PM

Page 140

140 Fundamentals of radio antennas

Resonance, resistance, and impedance
The antenna is a circuit element having distributed constants of inductance, capacitance, and resistance, which can be made to form a resonant circuit. The half-wave
antenna is the shortest resonant length of antenna. However, antennas which are
two or more half-wavelengths can also be resonant. Such antennas are said to operate on harmonics. If an antenna is four half-wavelengths at the transmitter frequency, it is being operated at the fourth harmonic of its lowest resonant frequency.
In other words, this antenna is a half-wavelength at one-quarter of the frequency
of operation. An antenna operating on the third harmonic is shown in Fig. 5-7.
Resistance A current flowing in the antenna must contend with three kinds of
resistance. With the antenna considered as a radiator of energy, the power expended
in the form of radiation can be thought of as an I 2Rt loss. Rt is called the radiation
resistance. With the antenna considered as a conductor, a certain amount of energy
is dissipated in the form of heat. In this I 2R0 loss, R0 is the ohmic resistance. There
is also an I 2R loss because of the leakage resistance of dielectric elements, such as
insulators. This R usually is included in the ohmic resistance.
The purpose of the antenna is to dissipate as much energy as possible in the
form of radiation. The energy dissipated by the radiation resistance, therefore, is
the useful part of the total power dissipated. Because the actual power loss depends
on the ohmic resistance, this resistance should be kept as low as possible. In the halfwave antenna, the radiation resistance is large compared to the ohmic resistance,
and most of the available energy is radiated. The half-wave antenna is, therefore, a
very efficient radiator for most purposes.
For a half-wave antenna fed at the center point, the radiation resistance is equal
to 73 Ω. The reference point is the center of the antenna at the time of peak current
flow. Ohmic resistance is referred to this point. The total resistance is of importance
in matching the antenna to a transmission line.
Impedance Because the half-wave antenna has different conditions of voltage
and current at different points, and because impedance is equal to the voltage across
a circuit divided by the current through it, the impedance will vary along the length
of the antenna. If E is divided by I at each point of the voltage and current curves in
Fig. 5-16, the result is the impedance curve, Z. The impedance is about 73 Ω at the
center point and rises to a value of about 2500 Ω at the ends.
The impedance of the half-wave antenna usually is considered to be the impedance as seen by the transmitter at the input terminals. This impedance consists of
both resistance and reactance. If the antenna is cut to a length of exact resonance,
the reactance is zero and the impedance is purely resistive. However, if the antenna
is longer or shorter than resonance, reactance is present. When the antenna is made
shorter, capacitive reactance is present; when the antenna is made longer, inductive
reactance is present.
The impedance at the antenna input terminals is important in terms of power efficiency. If the transmitter is feeding a nonresonant antenna, a power loss is caused
by the reactive component of the antenna impedance. Conversely, if the frequency
of the transmitter is changed, the electrical length of the antenna also changes. If the
frequency is made somewhat higher, the electrical length is made greater, and inductive reactance is added to the impedance. If the frequency is lowered, the electrical length is shortened, and capacitive reactance is added to the impedance.

6

CHAPTER

High-frequency
dipole and other
doublet antennas
A MYTH AROSE IN RADIO COMMUNICATIONS CIRCLES SOME TIME AGO. PEOPLE CAME TO

believe (especially in the ham and CB communities) that large antenna arrays are
absolutely necessary for effective communications, especially over long distances.
Overlooked, almost to the point of disdain, were effective (but simple) antennas that
can be erected by inexperienced people and made to work well. The simple dipole,
or doublet, is a case in point. This antenna is also sometimes called the Hertz, or
hertzian, antenna because radio pioneer Heinrich Hertz reportedly used this form
in his experiments.
The half-wavelength dipole is a balanced antenna consisting of two radiators
(Fig. 6-1) that are each a quarter-wavelength, making a total of a half-wavelength.
The antenna is usually installed horizontally with respect to the earth’s surface, so it
produces a horizontally polarized signal.
In its most common configuration (Fig. 6-1), the dipole is supported at each end
by rope and end insulators. The rope supports are tied to trees, buildings, masts, or
some combination of such structures.
The length of the antenna is a half-wavelength. Keep in mind that the physical
length of the antenna, and the theoretical electrical length, are often different by
about 5 percent. A free-space half-wavelength is found from
492
L = ᎏ ft
FMHz

[6.1]

In a perfect antenna, that is self-supported many wavelengths away from any object, Eq. 6.1 will yield the physical length. But in real antennas, the length calculated
Copyright 2001 - the McGraw-Hill Companies

141

Chap06_Carr

4/10/01

2:51 PM

Page 142

142 High-frequency dipole and other doublet antennas
I
R

R

L

I

I

I  Insulator
R  Rope (etc)

75  Coaxial cable

6-1 Simple half-wave dipole antenna.

above is too long. The average physical length is shortened by up to about 5 percent
because of the velocity factor of the wire and capacitive effects of the end insulators.
A more nearly correct approximation (remember that word, it's important) of a
half-wavelength antenna is
468
L =  ft
FMHz

[6.2]

where
L is the length of a half-wavelength radiator, in feet
FMHz is the operating frequency, in megahertz
Example Calculate the approximate physical length for a half-wavelength dipole operating on a frequency of 7.25 MHz.
Solution:
468
L =  ft
FMHz
468
=  ft = 64.55 ft
7.25
or, restated another way:
L = 64 ft 6.6 in
It is unfortunate that a lot of people accept Eq. 6.2 as a universal truth, a kind of
immutable law of The Universe. Perhaps abetted by books and articles on antennas
that fail to reveal the full story, too many people install dipoles without regard for

Chap06_Carr

4/10/01

2:51 PM

Page 143

The dipole feedpoint 143
reality. The issue is resonance. An antenna is a complex RLC network. At some frequency, it will appear like an inductive reactance (X = +jXL), and at others it will
appear like a capacitive reactance (X = –jXC ). At a specific frequency, the reactances are equal in magnitude, but opposite in sense, so they cancel each other out:
XL – XC = 0. At this frequency, the impedance is purely resistive, and the antenna is
said to be resonant.
The goal in erecting a dipole is to make the antenna resonant at a frequency that is
inside the band of interest, and preferably in the portion of the band most often used by
the particular station. Some of the implications of this goal are covered later on, but for
the present, assume that the builder will have to custom-tailor the length of the antenna. Depending on several local factors (among them, nearby objects, the shape of
the antenna conductor, and the length/diameter ratio of the conductor) it might prove
necessary to add, or trim, the length a small amount to reach resonance.

The dipole feedpoint
The dipole is a half-wavelength antenna fed in the center. Figure 6-2 shows the voltage (V ) and current (I ) distributions along the length of the half-wavelength radiator element. The feedpoint is at a voltage minimum and a current maximum, so you
can assume that the feedpoint is a current antinode.
At resonance, the impedance of the feedpoint is Ro = V/I. There are two resistances that make up Ro. The first is the ohmic losses that generate nothing but heat
when the transmitter is turned on. These ohmic losses come from the fact that conductors have electrical resistance and electrical connections are not perfect (even
when properly soldered). Fortunately, in a well-made dipole these losses are almost
negligible. The second contributor is the radiation resistance Rr of the antenna.
This resistance is a hypothetical concept that accounts for the fact that RF power is
radiated by the antenna. The radiation resistance is the fictional resistance that
would dissipate the amount of power that is radiated away from the antenna.
2500 
(end)
Z

6-2 Graph of current, voltage,
and impedance along
half-wavelength dipole.

E
I
73 
(center)

/2

Chap06_Carr

4/10/01

2:51 PM

Page 144

144 High-frequency dipole and other doublet antennas
For example, suppose we have a large-diameter conductor used as an antenna,
and it has negligible ohmic losses. If 1000 W of RF power is applied to the feedpoint,
and a current of 3.7 A is measured, what is the radiation resistance?
P
Rr = 2
I

[6.3]

1000 W
= 
(3.7)2

[6.4]

= 73 

[6.5]

It is always important to match the feedpoint impedance of an antenna to the
transmission-line impedance. Maximum power transfer always occurs (in any system) when the source and load impedances are matched. In addition, if some applied
power is not absorbed by the antenna (as happens in a mismatched system), then
the unabsorbed portion is reflected back down the transmission line toward the
transmitter. This fact gives rise to standing waves, and the so-called standing wave
ratio (SWR or VSWR) discussed in Chap. 3. This is a problem to overcome.
Matching antenna feedpoint impedance seems to be simplicity itself because the
free-space feedpoint impedance of a simple dipole is about 73 Ω, seemingly a good
match to 75-Ω coaxial cable. Unfortunately, the 73-Ω feedpoint impedance is almost
a myth. Figure 6-3 shows a plot of approximate radiation resistance (Rr ) versus
height above ground (as measured in wavelengths). As before, we deal in approximations in Fig. 6-3; in this case, the ambiguity is introduced by ground losses.
Despite the fact that Fig. 6-3 is based on approximations, you can see that radiation resistance varies from less than 10 Ω, to around 100 Ω, as a function of height.
At heights of many wavelengths, this oscillation of the curve settles down to the freespace impedance (72 Ω). At the higher frequencies, it might be possible to install a
dipole at a height of many wavelengths. In the 2-m amateur radio band (144 to 148
MHz), one wavelength is around 6.5 ft (i.e., 2 m × 3.28 ft/m), so “many wavelengths”
is relatively easy to achieve at reasonably attainable heights. In the 80-m band (3.5
to 4.0 MHz), however, one wavelength is on the order of 262 ft, so “many wavelengths” is a practical impossibility.
There are three tactics that can be followed. First, ignore the problem altogether. In many installations, the height above ground will be such that the radiation
resistance will be close enough to present only a slight impedance mismatch to a
standard coaxial cable. The VSWR is calculated (among other ways) as the ratio:
1. Zo > Rr:
Z
VSWR = o
Rr
2. Zo < Rr:

[6.6]

4/10/01

2:51 PM

Page 145

The dipole feedpoint 145

120

100

90

Radiation resistance Rr 

Chap06_Carr

80
Free

72
70

space
Rr

60

50

40

30

20

10
0
0

/4

/2

3/4



5/4

3/2

7/4

2

9/4

5/2

Height above ground (wavelengths)
6-3 Radiation resistance versus height above ground.

R
VSWR = r
Zo

[6.7]

where
Zo is the coaxial-cable characteristic impedance
Rr is the radiation resistance of the antenna
Consider an antenna mounted at a height somewhat less than a quarter-wavelength, such that the radiation resistance is 60 Ω. Although not recommended as

Chap06_Carr

4/10/01

2:51 PM

Page 146

146 High-frequency dipole and other doublet antennas
good engineering practice (there are sometimes practical reasons) it is nonetheless
necessary to install a dipole at less than optimum height. So, if that becomes necessary, what are the implications of feeding a 60-Ω antenna with either 52- or 75-Ω
standard coaxial cable? Some calculations are revealing:
For 75-Ω coaxial cable:
Zo
VSWR = 
Rr
75 Ω
=  = 1.25:1
60 Ω

[6.8]

[6.9]

For 52-Ω coaxial cable:
Rr
VSWR = 
Zo
60 Ω
=  = 1.15:1
52 Ω

[6.10]

[6.11]

In neither case is the VSWR created by the mismatch too terribly upsetting.
The second approach is to mount the antenna at a convenient height, and use an
impedance matching scheme to reduce the VSWR. In Chap. 23, you will find information on various suitable (relatively) broadbanded impedance matching methods
including Q-sections, coaxial impedance transformers, and broadband RF transformers. “Homebrew” and commercially available transformers are available to cover
most impedance transformation tasks.
The third approach is to mount the antenna at a height (Fig. 6-3) at which the
expected radiation resistance crosses a standard coaxial cable characteristic impedance. The best candidate seems to be a height of a half-wavelength because the radiation resistance is close to the free-space value of 72 Ω, and is thus a good match
for 75-Ω coaxial cable (such as RG-11/U or RG-59/U).

The dipole radiation pattern
The radiation patterns of various antennas are covered in this book. Some basic theory of patterns is repeated at each section, not to fill space, but rather to drive home
a point and refresh reader memories. We keep harking back to the concepts directivity and gain (which are actually different expressions of the same thing).
Antenna theory recognizes a point of reference called the isotropic radiator.
This device is a theoretical construct consisting of a spherical point source of RF radiation in all directions (see Chap. 2). It is truly omnidirectional (“all directions”)
because it creates an ever-expanding sphere as the RF wavefront propagates outward. Antenna gain is a measure of how the antenna focuses available power away
from a spherical wavefront to a limited number of directions (two, in the case of the
dipole). Thus are related the concepts directivity and gain.

Chap06_Carr

4/10/01

2:52 PM

Page 147

The dipole radiation pattern 147
Always keep in mind that directivity and gain are specified in three dimensions. Too many times, people simplify the topic too much by publishing only part of
the radiation pattern (azimuth aspect). In other words, the reader is given a pattern
viewed from above that shows the directivity in the horizontal plane. But a signal
does not propagate away from an antenna in an infinitely thin sheet, as such presentations seem to imply; rather, it has an elevation extent in addition to the azimuth
extent. Thus, proper evaluation of an antenna takes into consideration both horizontal and vertical plane patterns.
Figure 6-4 shows the radiation pattern of a dipole antenna in free space “in the
round.” In the horizontal plane (6-4A), when viewed from above, the pattern is a “figure

C

Antenna
axis

B
End view of
vertical plane
(rotated 90°
from solid figure)

A
315°

270°

45°

90°

0°
6-4 Idealized dipole radiation pattern.

Top view of
horizontal plane
(rotated 90°
from solid figure)

Chap06_Carr

4/10/01

2:52 PM

Page 148

148 High-frequency dipole and other doublet antennas
8” that exhibits bidirectional radiation. Two main “lobes” contain the RF power from the
transmitter, with sharp nulls of little or no power off the ends of the antenna axis. This
pattern is the classical dipole pattern that is published in most antenna books.
Also shown, however, is the vertical plane pattern for a dipole antenna in free
space. Note that when sliced in this aspect the radiation pattern is circular (Fig. 6-4B).
When the two patterns are combined in the round, you can see the three-dimensional
doughnut-shaped pattern (Fig. 6-4C) that most nearly approximates the true pattern
of an unobstructed dipole in free space.
When a dipole antenna is installed close to the earth’s surface, not in free space,
as is the case at most stations, the pattern is distorted from that of Fig. 6-4. Two effects must be taken into consideration. First, and most important, is the fact that the
signal from the antenna is reflected from the surface and bounces back into space.
This signal will be phase-shifted both by the reflection and by the time required for
the transit to occur. At points where the reflected wave combines in phase with the
radiated signal, the signal is reinforced; in places where it combines out of phase, the
signal is attenuated. Thus, the reflection of the signal from the ground alters the pattern from the antenna. The second factor is that the ground is lossy, so not all of the
signal is reflected; some of it heats the ground underneath the antenna. Thus, the
signal is attenuated at a greater rate than the inverse square law, so it further alters
the expected pattern.
Figure 6-5 shows patterns typical of dipole antennas installed close to the earth’s
surface. The views in this illustration correspond to Fig. 6-4B, in that they are looking at the vertical plane from a line along the antenna axis. Therefore, the antenna is
represented by R in each case shown. Figure 6-5A shows the case for a dipole

/8
R
G

A

/2
R

C

/4
R
G

B
6-5 Vertical extent of dipole antenna at (A) 1⁄8 wavelength, (B) 1⁄4 wavelength, and (C) 1⁄2 wavelength
above ground.

Chap06_Carr

4/10/01

2:52 PM

Page 149

The dipole radiation pattern 149
installed at 1/8 wavelength above the surface. For this antenna, most of the RF energy is radiated almost straight up (not very useful). This type of antenna is basically
limited to ground wave and very short skip (when available). The second case (Fig.
6-5B) shows the pattern when the antenna is a quarter wavelength above the earth’s
surface. Here the pattern is flattened, but it still shows considerable energy in the
vertical direction (where it is useless). Finally, you can see the pattern obtained
when the antenna is installed a half-wavelength above the surface. In this case, the
pattern is best for long-distance work because energy is redirected away from
straight-up into lobes at relatively shallow angles.

Tuning the dipole antenna
There are two issues to address when tuning an antenna (any antenna, not just the
dipole): resonance and impedance matching. Although frequently treated in the
literature as the same issue, they are not. This section deals mostly with the process
of tuning the antenna to resonance. Although not all forms of antenna are resonant,
the dipole is an example of a resonant antenna.
There is a lot of misinformation abroad concerning the tuning of antennas. Perhaps much of what is believed comes from the fact that VSWR is used as the indicator of both impedance matching and resonance. Quite a few people honestly, but
erroneously, believe that the VSWR can be “tuned out” by adjusting the length of
the feedline. That myth probably derives from the fact that voltage or current sensing instruments are used for VSWR measurement, and these are affected by transmission line length. But that fact is caused by a weakness in the instruments, not by
radio physics.
There is only one proper way to tune a dipole antenna: adjust the length of the
antenna elements, not the transmission line. It was in order to make these adjustments that we purposely did not initially tell you to solder the electrical connections
at the center insulator.
Resonance The indicator of resonance is the minimum point in the VSWR
curve. Figure 6-6 shows a graph of VSWR vs. frequency for several different cases.
Curve A represents a disaster: a high VSWR all across the band. The actual value of
VSWR can be anything from about 3.5:1 to 10:1, or thereabouts, but the cause is
nonetheless the same: the antenna is either open or shorted; or it is so far off resonance as to appear to be open or shorted to the VSWR meter.
Curves B and C represent antennas that are resonant within the band of interest. Curve B represents a broadbanded antenna that is relatively flat all across the
band and does not exhibit excessive VSWR until the frequency is outside of
the band. Curve C is also resonant within the band, but this antenna has a much
higher Q than curve B. In the naive sense, the broadbanded antenna is best, but
that statement is true only if the broadness is not purchased at the expense of
efficiency. Losses tend to broaden the antenna, but also reduce its effectiveness.
So, if broad bandedness is purchased at the risk of increased loss, then it is less
than desirable.
Curves D and E are resonant outside the band of interest. The curve marked D
is resonant at a frequency on the low side of the band, so the dipole is too long. In
this case, you need to shorten the antenna a bit to raise the resonant point inside

Chap06_Carr

4/10/01

2:52 PM

Page 150

150 High-frequency dipole and other doublet antennas

4:1

A

VSWR

3.5 : 1

3:1

2:1

1.5 : 1
B
D

C

1:1
Lower
band
edge

Design
frequency

E
Upper
band
edge

FREQUENCY
6-6 VSWR versus frequency for several cases.

the band. Curve E represents an antenna that is resonant outside the upper limit
of the band, so this antenna is too short, and must be lengthened. Because this situation is possible, the antenna elements are typically made longer than needed
when they are first cut.
How much to cut? That depends on two factors: how far from the desired frequency the resonant point is found, and which band is being used. The latter requirement comes from the fact that the “frequency per unit length” varies from
one band to another. Look at an example of how to calculate this figure. The procedure is simple:
1. Calculate the length required for the upper end of the band.
2. Calculate the length required for the bottom end of the band.
3. Calculate the difference in lengths for the upper and lower ends of the band.
4. Calculate the width of the band in kilohertz by taking the difference between
the upper frequency limit and the lower frequency limit.
5. Divide the length difference by the frequency difference; the result is in kilohertz per unit length.
Example 6-1 Calculate the frequency change per unit of length for 80 and
for 15 m.
Solution For 80 m (3.5 to 4.0 MHz):

Chap06_Carr

4/10/01

2:52 PM

Page 151

The dipole radiation pattern 151
468
1. Lft =  = 117 ft
4 MHz
468
2. Lft =  = 133.7 ft
3.5 MHz
3. Difference in length: 133.7 ft – 117 ft = 16.7 ft
4. Frequency difference: 4000 kHz – 3500 kHz = 500 kHz
frequency
500 kHz
5. Calculate  :  = 30 kHz/ft
unit length
16.7 ft
For 15 m (21.0 – 21.45 MHz):
468
1. Lft =  = 21.82 ft
21.45
468
2. Lft =  = 22.29 ft
21
3. Difference in length: 22.29 ft – 21.82 ft = 0.47 ft
4. Convert to inches: 0.47 ft × 12 in/ft = 5.64 in
5. Frequency difference: 21,450 kHz – 21,000 kHz = 450 kHz
frequency 450 kHz
6. Calculate  :  = 80 kHz/in
unit length
5.64 in
At 80 m, the frequency change per foot is small, but at 15 m small changes can
result in very large frequency shifts. You can calculate approximately how much to
add (or subtract) from an antenna under construction from this kind of calculation.
If, for example, you design an antenna for the so-called “net frequency” on 15 m
(21,390 kHz), and find the actual resonant point is 21,150 kHz, the frequency shift
required is 21,390 – 21,150, or 240 kHz. To determine how much to add or subtract
(as a first guess):
1. The factor for 15 m is 80 kHz/in, which is the same as saying 1 in/80 kHz.
2. The required frequency shift is 240 kHz.
3. Therefore:
1 in
Length change = 240 kHz × 
80 kHz

[6.12]

= 3 in

[6.13]

Each side of the antenna must be changed by half of the length calculated above,
or 1.5 in. Because the first resonant frequency is less than the desired frequency, the
length should be shortened 1.5 in. Once the length is correct, as proven by the VSWR
curve, the connections at the center insulator are soldered and made permanent,
and the antenna rehoisted to the operating level.
Impedance matching The difference between resonance and impedance
matching is seen in the value of the VSWR minimum. While the minimum indicates
the resonant point, its value is a measure of the relationship between the feedpoint

Chap06_Carr

4/10/01

2:52 PM

Page 152

152 High-frequency dipole and other doublet antennas
impedance of the antenna and the characteristic impedance of the transmission line.
Earlier in this chapter you learned that
1. Zo > Rr:
Z
VSWR = o
Rr

[6.14]

R
VSWR = r
Zo

[6.15]

2. Zo < Rr:

where
Zo is the coaxial-cable characteristic impedance
Rr is the radiation resistance of the antenna
Although knowledge of the VSWR will not show which situation is true, you can
know that there is a high probability that one of them is true, and you can experiment to find which is the case. Of course, if the VSWR is less than about 1.5:1 or 2:1,
then forget about it—the improvement is not generally worth the expense and cost.
When coupled to a transmitter that is equipped with the tunable output network
(most tube-type transmitters or final amplifiers), then it can accommodate a relatively wide range of reflected antenna impedances. But modern solid-state final amplifiers tend to be a little more picky about the load impedance. For these
transmitters, a coax-to-coax antenna tuning unit (ATU) is needed.

Other dipoles
Thus far, the dipoles covered in this chapter have been the classic form, in which a
half-wavelength single-conductor radiator element is connected to a coaxial transmission line. This antenna is typically installed horizontally at a half-wavelength
above the earth’s surface (or wherever convenient if that is impossible). This section
looks at other forms of the dipole. Some of these dipoles are in every way the equal
of the horizontal dipole, and others are basically compensation antennas in that they
are used when a proper dipole is not practical.

Inverted-vee dipole
The inverted-vee dipole is a half-wavelength antenna fed in the center like a dipole.
By the rigorous definition, the inverted-vee is merely a variation on the dipole
theme. But in this form of antenna (Fig. 6-7), the center is elevated as high as possible from the earth’s surface, but the ends droop to very close to the surface. Angle a
can be almost anything convenient, provided that a > 90 degrees; typically, most inverted-vee antennas use an angle of about 120 degrees. Although essentially a compensation antenna for use when the dipole is not practical, many operators believe
that it is essentially a better performer on 40 and 80 m in cases where the dipole cannot be mounted at a half-wavelength (64 ft or so).
By sloping the antenna elements down from the horizontal to an angle (as shown
in Fig. 6-7), the resonant frequency is effectively lowered. Thus, the antenna will

Chap06_Carr

4/10/01

2:52 PM

Page 153

Other dipoles 153

a
Coaxial
cable to
transmitter

L

L
Insulated
support

R
S

L

220
Feet
FMHz
R

I

S

I
I  Insulator
S  Support stake
R  Rope

6-7 Inverted-vee dipole.

need to be shorter for any given frequency than a dipole. There is no absolutely rigorous equation for calculation of the overall length of the antenna elements. Although the concept of “absolute” length does not hold for regular dipoles, it is even
less viable for the inverted-vee. There is, however, a rule of thumb that can be followed for a starting point: Make the antenna about 6 percent shorter than a dipole
for the same frequency. The initial cut of the antenna element lengths (each quarter
wavelength) is
220
L =  ft
[6.16]
FMHz
After this length is determined, the actual length is found from the same cutand-try method used to tune the dipole in the previous section.
Bending the elements downward also changes the feedpoint impedance of the
antenna and narrows its bandwidth. Thus, some adjustment in these departments is
in order. You might want to use an impedance matching scheme at the feedpoint, or
an antenna tuner at the transmitter.

Sloping dipole (“sloper” or “slipole”)
The sloping dipole (Fig. 6-8) is popular with those operators who need a low angle
of radiation, and are not overburdened with a large amount of land to install the
antenna. This antenna is also called the sloper and the slipole in various texts. The
author prefers the term “slipole,” in order to distinguish this antenna from a sloping
vertical of the same name. Whatever it is called, however, it is a half-wavelength dipole that is built with one end at the top of a support, and the other end close to the

Chap06_Carr

4/10/01

2:52 PM

Page 154

154 High-frequency dipole and other doublet antennas
R
I

I
Coax to
transmitter

I  Insulator
S  Support stake
R  Rope

R

S

I

6-8 “Slipole” or “sloper.”

ground, and being fed in the center by coaxial cable. Some of the same comments as
obtained for the inverted-vee antenna also apply to the sloping dipole, so please see
that section also.
Some operators like to arrange four sloping dipoles from the same mast such
that they point in different directions around the compass (Fig. 6-9). A single fourposition coaxial cable switch will allow switching a directional beam around the compass to favor various places in the world.

Broadbanded dipoles
One of the rarely discussed aspects of antenna construction is that the length/diameter ratio of the conductor used for the antenna element is a factor in determining the
bandwidth of the antenna. In general, the rule of thumb states that large cross-sectional area makes the antenna more broadbanded. In some cases, this rule suggests
the use of aluminum tubing instead of copper wire for the antenna radiator. On the
higher-frequency bands that is a viable solution. Aluminum tubing can be purchased
for relatively small amounts of money, and is both lightweight and easily worked with
ordinary tools. But, as the frequency decreases, the weight becomes greater because
the tubing is both longer and (for structural strength) must be of greater diameter.
On 80 m, aluminum tubing is impractical, and at 40 m it is nearly so. Yet, 80 m is a significant problem, especially for older transmitters, because the band is 500 kHz wide,
and the transmitters often lack the tuning range for the entire band.
Some other solution is needed. Here are three basic solutions to the problem of
wide-bandwidth dipole antennas: folded dipole, bowtie dipole, and cage dipole.

Chap06_Carr

4/10/01

2:52 PM

Page 155

Other dipoles 155

Mast

(Top view)

6-9 Directional antenna made
of four slopers (top view).

Figure 6-10A shows the folded dipole antenna. This antenna basically consists
of two half-wavelength conductors shorted together at the ends and fed in the middle of one of them. The folded dipole is most often built from 300-Ω television antenna twin-lead transmission line. Because the feedpoint impedance is nearly 300 Ω,
the same type of twin lead can also be used for the transmission line. The folded dipole will exhibit excellent wide-bandwidth properties, especially on the lower bands.
A disadvantage of this form of antenna is that the transmitter has to match the
300-Ω balanced transmission line. Unfortunately, most modern radio transmitters
are designed to feed coaxial-cable transmission line. Although an antenna tuner can
be placed at the transmitter end of the feedline, it is also possible to use a 4:1 balun
transformer at the feedpoint (Fig. 6-10B). This arrangement makes the folded dipole
a reasonable match to 52- or 75-Ω coaxial-cable transmission line.
Another method for broadbanding the dipole is to use two identical dipoles fed
from the same transmission line, and arranged to form a “bowtie” as shown in Fig. 6-11.
The use of two identical dipole elements on each side of the transmission line has the
effect of increasing the conductor cross sectional area so that the antenna has a slightly
improved length/diameter ratio.
The bowtie dipole was popular in the 1930s and 1940s, and became the basis for
the earliest television receiver antennas (TV signals are 3 to 5 MHz wide, so they require
a broadbanded antenna). It was also popular during the 1950s as the so-called Wonder
Bar antenna for 10 m. It still finds use, but it has faded somewhat in popularity.
The cage diople (Fig. 6-12) is similar in concept, if not construction, to the
bowtie. Again, the idea is to connect several parallel dipoles together from the same
transmission line in an effort to increase the apparent cross-sectional area. In the
case of the cage dipole, however, spreader disk insulators are constructed to keep
the wires separated. The insulators can be built from plexiglass, lucite, or ceramic.

Chap06_Carr

4/10/01

2:52 PM

Page 156

156 High-frequency dipole and other doublet antennas
L

300-
parallel
line or
twinlead

To
XMTR
6-10A Folded dipole fed with 300-Ω line.

4:1
BALUN
75- coax
to XMTR
6-10B Folded dipole fed with coaxial cable.
I

R

I

I

75- coax
to XMTR
6-11 Bowtie dipole.

I = Insulator
R = Rope

R

Chap06_Carr

4/10/01

2:52 PM

Page 157

Other dipoles 157
S

S

I

I

R

I

R

I  Insulator
R  Rope (etc.)
S  Spreader

Jumper

6 to 12
inches

Solder

Spreader
detail
6-12 Cage dipole.

They can also be constructed of materials such as wood, if the wood is properly
treated with varnish, polyurethene, or some other material that prevents it from becoming waterlogged. The spreader disks are held in place with wire jumpers (see inset to Fig. 6-12) that are soldered to the main element wires.
A tactic used by some builders of both bowtie and cage dipoles is to make the elements slightly different lengths. This “stagger tuning” method forces one dipole to
favor the upper end of the band, and the other to favor the lower end of the band.
The overall result is a slightly flatter frequency response characteristic across the
entire band. On the cage dipole, with four half-wavelength elements, it should be
possible to overlap even narrower sections of the band in order to create an even
flatter characteristic.

Shortened coil-loaded dipoles
The half-wavelength dipole is too long for some applications where real estate is at a
premium. The solution for many operators is to use a coil-loaded shortened dipole
such as shown in Fig. 6-13. A shortened dipole (i.e., one which is less than a halfwavelength) is capacitive reactance. There is no reason why the loading coil cannot
be any point along the radiator, but in Figs. 6-13A and 6-13B they are placed at 0 percent and 50 percent of the element length, respectively. The reason for this procedure is that it makes the calculation of coil inductances easier, and it also represents
the most common practice.
Figure 6-13C shows a table of inductive reactances as a function of the percentage of a half-wavelength, represented by the shortened radiator. It is likely that
the percentage figure will be imposed on you by the situation, but the general rule
is to pick the largest figure consistent with the available space. For example, sup-

Chap06_Carr

4/10/01

2:52 PM

Page 158

158 High-frequency dipole and other doublet antennas

A

X
C

A

A

B

B

B
L2

L1

L1  L2  L
C  2A
A  1/2C

C
C

468M
FMHz

OM1

D

Percent
of halfwavelength

Coils at
Coils at
middle of
feedpoint () radiators ()
1800
950
700
500
360
260
160
75
38
15

20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
95
98

2800
1800
1800
1300
950
700
500
160
80
30

E

6-13 Shortened or loaded dipole. (A) inductors at feedpoint; (B) inductors midway along elements; (C)
chart of reactances for coils; (D) commercially available coils; (E) homemade coil based on commercial coil stock.

Chap06_Carr

4/10/01

2:52 PM

Page 159

Other dipoles 159
pose you have about 40 ft available for a 40-m antenna that normally needs about
65 ft for a half-wavelength. Because 39 ft is 60 percent of 65 ft, you could use this
value as the design point for this antenna. Looking on the chart, a 60 percent antenna with the loading coils at the midpoint of each radiator element wants to see
an inductive reactance of 700 Ω. You can rearrange the standard inductive reactance equation (XL = 6.28 FL) to the form
XL × 106
LµH = 
6.28F

[6.17]

where
LµH is the required inductance, in microhenrys
F is the frequency, in hertz (Hz)
XL is the inductive reactance calculated from the table in Fig. 6-13C.
Example 6-2 Calculate the inductance required for a 60 percent antenna operating on 7.25 MHz. The table requires a reactance of 700 Ω for a loaded dipole with
the coils in the center of each element (Fig. 6-15B).
Solution:
XL × 106
LµH = 
6.28F

[6.18]

(700) (106)
= 
(6.28) (7,250,000)

[6.19]

7 × 108
= 7
4.6 × 10

[6.20]

= 15.4 µH

[6.21]

The inductance calculated above is approximate, and it might have to be altered
by cut-and-try methods.
The loaded dipole antenna is a very sharply tuned antenna. Because of this fact,
you must either confine operation to one segment of the band, or provide an antenna
tuner to compensate for the sharpness of the bandwidth characteristic. However, efficiency drops, markedly, far from resonance even with a transmission line tuner.
The function of the tuner is to overcome the bad effects on the transmitter, but it
does not alter the basic problem. Only a variable inductor in the antenna will do that
trick (at least one commercial loaded dipole once used a motor-driven inductor at
the center feedpoint).
Figures 6-13D and E show two methods for making a coil-loaded dipole antenna.
Figure 6-13D shows a pair of commercially available loading coils especially designed
for this purpose. The ones shown here are for 40 m, but other models are also available. The inductor shown in Fig. 6-13E is a section of commercial coil stock connected to a standard end or center insulator. No structural stress is assumed by the
coil—all forces are applied to the insulator, which is designed to take it.

Chap06_Carr

4/10/01

2:52 PM

Page 160

160 High-frequency dipole and other doublet antennas
Inductance values for other length antennas can be approximated from the
graph in Fig. 6-14. This graph contains three curves for coil-loaded, shortened
dipoles that are 10, 50, and 90 percent of the normal half-wavelength size. Find
the proposed location of the coil, as a percentage of the wire element length, along
the horizontal axis. Where the vertical line from that point intersects with one of the
three curves, that intersection yields the inductive reactance required (see along
vertical axis). Inductances for other overall lengths can be “rough-guessed” by interpolating between the three available curves, and then validated by cut and try.

Tunable dipoles
Dipoles are resonant antennas, so they naturally tend to prefer one frequency over the
others. The VSWR will be quite low at the resonant point (assuming no feedline mismatch problems), and will rise at frequencies above and below resonance. If the antenna is a high-Q model, then the effect is quite profound, and it might render the
antenna nearly useless at frequencies on the other end of the same band (especially
where modern transmitters equipped with VSWR shutdown circuitry are used). Figure
6-15 shows a method for overcoming this problem. Here is how it works.
An antenna that is too long for the desired resonant frequency will act inductively (i.e., it will show a feedpoint impedance of the form Z = R + jXL ). To counteract the inductive reactance component +jXL it is necessary to add a bit of capacitive
reactance –jXc . This approach is taken in tuning certain antenna forms and it can be
used with dipoles to make the antenna tunable over a range of about 15 percent of
the frequency.
The tunable dipole of Fig. 5-15 is longer than other dipoles and it has an overall
length of
505
L' = 
[6.22]
FMHz
Note that the velocity constant is 505, rather than the 468 that is used with ordinary dipoles.
The required capacitive reactance, which is used to electrically shorten the antenna, is provided by C1. In one effective design that I’ve tested, the capacitor was a
500-pF transmitting variable type. When the Heath Company was making kits, they
offered an antenna tuner based on this idea. It was a motor-driven 500-pF variable
capacitor inside of a weather-resistant metal-shielded case. The Heath tuner can be
used on inverted vees and dipoles (if a center support is provided). A low-voltage
(which is necessary for safety reasons) dc motor drives the shaft of the capacitor to
tune the antenna to resonance.

Stacked dipoles
Figure 6-16 shows a double dipole (i.e., two half-wavelength dipole antennas
spaced a half-wavelength apart). The transmission lines are connected in parallel at
the receiver. This antenna provides about 3-dB gain over a single dipole, and it adds
a bit of fade protection because two side-by-side antennas provide a bit of space diversity (see the end of Chap. 2 for information on diversity reception).

4/10/01

2:52 PM

Page 161

Other dipoles 161
10 K
9
8
7
6
5
4
10%
Inductive reactance (XL) of coil (ohms)

Chap06_Carr

3

2

1000
9
8

50%

7
6
5
4

3

2

90%

100
9
80 8
7
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

Coil location as a percentage
of element length

6-14 Inductive reactance versus coil location for shortened inductance-loaded dipole.

100

Chap06_Carr

4/10/01

2:52 PM

Page 162

162 High-frequency dipole and other doublet antennas

L'
R

I

I

R

DC motor

R = rope
I = insulator
Coax to
RIG or RCVR

L' = 505/FMHZ
6-15 Electrically reducing the length of a dipole antenna by placing a capacitor at the feedpoint.

R

I

1:1
BALUN

I

R

1:1
BALUN

I

I

R

75  coax

R  Rope
I  Insulator

Box
(see text)

XMTR
6-16 Phased dipoles provide a 3-dB gain over single dipole.

The two dipoles are supported by a common structure consisting of ropes (R)
and end insulators (I) to support masts on the ends. In the center, a half-wavelength
space is taken up by a rope so that the structure is maintained. The space is determined by
492
Spacefeet = 
[6.23]
FMHz
and, for the dipoles,
468
Lengthfeet = 
FMHz

[6.24]

The stacked dipole gets a bit lengthy on low-frequency bands, but is easily
achievable by most people on the upper HF bands.

Chap06_Carr

4/10/01

2:52 PM

Page 163

Off-center-fed full-wave doublet (OCFD) antennas 163
The feedlines for the two dipoles can be connected directly in parallel and fed
from the transmitter, provided that the antenna tuning unit will support one-half the
normal expected impedance. Alternatively, a box can be provided that includes a
matching transformer for 1:2 ratio. These can be built like a balun transformer on a
toroidal core. A trifilar winding is used. Alternatively, a phasing box can be built that
will allow altering the directionality of the antenna by 90°. This is done by using the
switching circuit to reverse the sense of L3.

Off-center-fed full-wave doublet (OCFD) antennas
An antenna that superficially resembles the Windom is the off-center-fed doublet
(OCFD) antenna of Fig. 6-17. It is a single-band antenna, although at harmonics it
will begin to act as a resonant, standing wave, longwire antenna. The overall length
is one wavelength long:
936
Lfeet = 
[6.25]
FMHz
This antenna works best at heights of at least λ/2 above ground, so practical considerations limit it to frequencies above about 10 MHz (i.e., 30-m band). The feedpoint of the antenna is placed at a distance of λ/4 from one end, and is a good match
for 75-Ω coaxial cable. A 1:1 balun transformer at the feedpoint is highly recommended. The pattern of a 1λ antenna is a four-lobe “cloverleaf,” with the major lobes
being about 53° from the wire. The gain is about 1 dB.


2


2
Rope

EI

EI
1:1 BALUN

7.5  coax

6-17 Off-center-fed 1-wire antenna.

Rope

Chap06_Carr

4/10/01

2:52 PM

Page 164

164 High-frequency dipole and other doublet antennas

Off-center-fed nonresonant sloper (OCFS)
Perhaps more viable for many people is the nonresonant off-center-fed sloper
(OCFS) antenna of Fig. 6-18. This antenna consists of a wire radiator that must be
longer than 3λ/2 at the lowest frequency of operation. The feedpoint is elevated at
least λ/4 above ground at the lowest operating frequency. The antenna is fed with
75-Ω coaxial cable. The shield of the coax is connected to a λ/4 resonant radial
(counterpoise ground). There should be at least one radial (more is better) per band
of operation.
The far end of the radiator element is sloped to ground, where it is terminated in
a 270-Ω noninductive resistor. The resistor should be able to dissipate up to onethird of the power level applied by the transmitter.

Double extended Zepp antenna
The double extended Zepp antenna (Fig. 6-19) provides a gain of about 2 dB over a
dipole at right angles to the antenna wire plane. It consists of two sections of wire,
each one of a length
600
L1feet = 
[6.26]
FMHz


4 radial

Rope
EI

Wire antenna element ( 3/4  at lowest frequency)

Direction of
reception
Coax to
receiver

Mast

Ground

6-18 Terminated sloper antenna.

R1
270 
2-watt

Ground
connection

Chap06_Carr

4/10/01

2:52 PM

Page 165

Collinear “Franklin” array antenna 165

L1

Rope

L1

EI

EI

Rope

L2

(ZL

150 )

6-19 Double extended Zepp antenna.

Typical lengths are 20.7 ft on the 10-m band, 28 ft on the 15-m band, 42 ft on the
20-m band, and 84 ft on the 40-m band.
The double extended Zepp antenna can be fed directly with 450-Ω twin lead, especially if a balanced antenna tuner is available at the receiver. Alternatively, it can
be fed from a quarter-wavelength matching section (made of 450-Ω twin lead, or
equivalent open air parallel line), as shown, and a balun if coax is preferred. The
length of the matching section should be
103
L2feet = 
FMHz

[6.27]

The double extended Zepp will work on several different bands. For example, a
20-m-band double extended Zepp will work as a Zepp on the design band, a dipole on
frequencies below the design band, and as a four-lobed cloverleaf antenna on frequencies above the design band.

Collinear “Franklin” array antenna
Perhaps the cheapest approach to very serious antenna gain is the collinear Franklin
array shown in Fig. 6-20. This antenna pushes the dipole and double extended Zepp
concepts even farther. It consists of a half-wavelength dipole that is center-fed with a
4:1 balun and 75-Ω coaxial cable. At each end of the dipole, there is a quarter-wavelength phase reversal stub that end-feeds another half-wavelength element. Each element is a half-wavelength (λ/2) long, and its length can be calculated from
λ
492
 =
2
FMHz

[6.28]

The phase reversal stubs are a quarter-wavelength long, or one half the length calculated by Eq. 6.28.

Chap06_Carr

4/10/01

2:52 PM

Page 166

166 High-frequency dipole and other doublet antennas

EI


2


2

EI

EI


2

EI

Rope

4:1 BALUN

4

/4

75  coax to
receiver

6-20 Wire collinear antenna.

The version of the “Collinear” shown in Fig. 6-20 has a gain of about 3 dB. There
is no theoretical reason why you can’t extend the design indefinitely, but there is a
practical limit set by how much wire can be held by your supports, and how much
real estate you own. A 4.5-dB version can be built by adding another half-wavelength
section at each end, with an intervening quarter-wavelength phase reversal stub in
between each new section, and the preceding section. Once you get longer than five
half-wavelengths, which provides the 4.5-dB gain, the physical size becomes a bit of
a bother for most folks.

The TCFTFD dipole
The tilted, center-fed, terminated, folded dipole (TCFTFD, also called the T2FD or
TTFD) is an answer to both the noise pickup and length problems that sometimes affect other antennas. For example, a random-length wire, even with antenna tuner,
will pick up considerable amounts of noise. A dipole for 40 m is 66 ft long.
This antenna was first described publicly in 1949 by Navy Captain C. L. Countryman, although the U.S. Navy tested it for a long period in California during World
War II. The TCFTFD can offer claimed gains of 4 to 6 dB over a dipole, depending on
the frequency and design, although 1 to 3 dB is probably closer to the mark in practice, and less than 1 dB will be obtained at some frequencies within its range (especially where the resistor has to absorb a substantial portion of the RF power). The
main attraction of the TCFTFD is not its gain, but rather its broad bandedness.
In addition, the TCFTFD can also be used at higher frequencies than its design
frequency. Some sources claim that the TCFTFD can be used over a 5 or 6:1 frequency range, although my own observations are that 4:1 is more likely. Nonetheless,
a 40-m antenna will work over a range of 7000 to 25,000 kHz, with at least some decent performance up into the 11-m Citizen’s Band (27,000 kHz).
The basic TCFTFD (Fig. 6-21) resembles a folded dipole in that it has two parallel conductors of length L, spaced a distance W apart, and shorted together at the

Chap06_Carr

4/10/01

2:52 PM

Page 167

The TCFTFD dipole 167

L

30°
10°

D

R
C2 3901
Ht

4:1 balun

(noninductive)

A2

C1
A1

W  9.8 ft
FMHz

75-
coaxial
cable
L

6ft

B

6ft

6-21 TTFD antenna.

ends. The feedpoint is the middle of one conductor, where a 4:1 balun coil and
75-Ω coaxial-cable transmission line to the transceiver are used. A noninductive,
390-Ω resistor is placed in the center of the other conductor. This resistor can be a
carbon-composition (or metal-film) resistor, but it must not be a wirewound resistor
or any other form that has appreciable inductance. The resistor must be able to dissipate about one-third of the applied RF power. The TCFTFD can be built from ordinary no.14 stranded antenna wire.
For a TCFTFD antenna covering 40 through 11 m, the spread between the conductors should be 191⁄2 in, while the length L is 27 ft. Note that length L includes
one-half of the 19-in spread because it is measured from the center of the antenna
element to the center of the end supports.
The TCFTFD is a sloping antenna, with the lower support being about 6 ft off the
ground. The height of the upper support depends on the overall length of the antenna. For a 40-m design, the height is on the order of 50 ft.
The parallel wires are kept apart by spreaders. At least one commercial TCFTFD
antenna uses PVC spreaders, while others use ceramic. You can use wooden dowels
of between 1-in and 5⁄8-in diameter; of course, a coating of varnish (or urethane
spray) is recommended for weather protection. Drill two holes, of a size sufficient to

Chap06_Carr

4/10/01

2:52 PM

Page 168

168 High-frequency dipole and other doublet antennas
pass the wire, that are the dimension W apart (19 in for 40 m). Once the spreaders
are in place, take about a foot of spare antenna wire and make jumpers to hold the
dowels in place. The jumper is wrapped around the antenna wire on either side of
the dowel, and then soldered.
The two end supports can be made of 1 × 2 in wood treated with varnish or urethane spray. The wire is passed through screw eyes fastened to the supports. A support rope is passed through two holes on either end of the 1 × 2 and then tied off at
an end insulator.
The TCFTFD antenna is noticeably quieter than the random-length wire antenna, and somewhat quieter than the half-wavelength dipole. When the tilt angle is
around 30°, the pattern is close to omnidirectional. Although a little harder to build
than dipoles, it offers some advantages that ought not to be overlooked. These dimensions will suffice when the “bottom end” frequency is the 40-m band, and it will
work well on higher bands.

Vee-sloper antenna
The vee-sloper antenna is shown in Fig. 6-22. It is related to the vee beam (covered
in Chap. 9), but it is built like a sloper (i.e., with the feed end of the antenna high
above ground). The supporting mast height should be about half (to three-fourths)
of the length of either antenna leg. The legs are sloped downward to terminating

ATU
L
Coax
To
RCVR


L

R

R

6-22 Vee-sloper antenna.

R 270 
L>

Chap06_Carr

4/10/01

2:52 PM

Page 169

Multiband fan dipole 169
resistors at ground level. Each wire should be longer than 1λ at the lowest operating
frequency. The terminating resistors should be on the order of 270 Ω (about one-half
of the characteristic impedance of the antenna), with a power rating capable of dissipating one-third of the transmitter power. Like other terminating resistors, these
should be noninductive (carbon composition or metal film).
The advantage of this form of antenna over the vee beam is that it is vertically
polarized, and the resistors are close to the earth, so they are easily grounded.

Rhombic inverted-vee antenna
A variation on the theme is the vertically polarized rhombic of Fig. 6-23. Although
sometimes called an inverted vee—not to be confused with the dipole variant of the
same name—this antenna is half a rhombic, with the missing half being “mirrored” in
the ground (similar to a vertical). The angle at the top of the mast (Φ) is typically
≥ 90°, and 120 to 145° is more common. Each leg (A) should be ≥λ, with the longer
lengths being somewhat higher in gain, but harder to install for low frequencies. A
requirement for this type of antenna is a very good ground connection. This is often
accomplished by routing an underground wire between the terminating resistor
ground and the feedpoint ground.

Multiband fan dipole
The basic half-wavelength dipole antenna is a very good performer, especially when
cost is a factor. The dipole yields relatively good performance for practically no in-

Direction of
reception

A



A

Mast

R1

To
RCVR

6-23 Inverted-vee antenna.

Chap06_Carr

4/10/01

2:52 PM

Page 170

170 High-frequency dipole and other doublet antennas
vestment. A standard half-wavelength dipole offers a bidirectional figure-8 pattern
on its basic band (i.e., where the length is a half-wavelength), and a four-lobe cloverleaf pattern at frequencies for which the physical length is 3λ/2. Thus, a 40-m halfwavelength dipole produces a bidirectional pattern on 40 m, and a four-lobe
cloverleaf pattern on 15 m.
The dipole is not easily multibanded without resorting to traps (covered in
Chap. 8). One can, however, tie several dipoles to the same center insulator or balun
transformer. Figure 6-24 shows three dipoles cut for different bands, operating from
a common feedline and balun transformer: A1–A2, B1–B2, and C1–C2. Each of these
antennas is a half-wavelength (i.e., Lfeet = 468/FMHz).
There are two points to keep in mind when building this antenna. First, try to
keep the ends spread a bit apart, and second, make sure that none of the antennas
is cut as a half-wavelength for a band for which another is 3λ/2. For example, if you
make A1–A2 cut for 40 m, then don’t cut any of the other three for 15 m. If you do,
the feedpoint impedance and the radiation pattern will be affected.

The counterpoise longwire
The longwire antenna is an end-fed wire more than 2λ long. It provides considerable gain over a dipole, especially when a very long length can be accommodated. Although 75- to 80-m, or even 40-m longwires are a bit difficult to erect at most
locations, they are well within reason at the upper end of the HF spectrum. Low-VHF

Rope

Rope

EI
EI

A1
Rope

EI

C1
or
1:1
BALUN

A2

B1

B2

C1

C2

EI

Rope

EI

EI
Rope

Rope

Coax to
receiver

6-24 Multiband dipole antenna.

Chap06_Carr

4/10/01

2:52 PM

Page 171

The counterpoise longwire 171
band operation is also practical. Indeed, I know one fellow who lived in far southwest
Virginia as a teenager, and he was able to get his family television reception for very
low cost by using a TV longwire (channel 6) on top of his mountain.
There are some problems with longwires that are not often mentioned. Two
problems seem to insinuate themselves into the process. First, the Zepp feed is a bit
cumbersome (not everyone is enamored of parallel transmission line). Second, how
do you go about actually grounding that termination resistor? If it is above ground,
then the wire to ground is long, and definitely not at ground potential for RF. If you
want to avoid both the straight Zepp feed system employed by most such antennas,
as well as the resistor-grounding problem, then you might want to consider the
counterpoise longwire antennas shown in Fig. 6-25.


4
Rope


4

2

R1

EI
4:1 balun
transformer

Coax to
transmitter

EI

Rope

Radiator

EI  end insulator
R  rope
R1  termination resistor
(noninductive)

6-25A Longwire with λ/4 radials used as counterpoise ground at feedpoint and terminating resistor.
Wire  2 long

4 Radial
Rope

EI

T1
4:1 balun
transformer

EI

EI  end insulator
R  rope support
75-
coaxial cable
to receiver
6-25B Balun transformer feed for longwire antenna.

Rope

Chap06_Carr

4/10/01

2:52 PM

Page 172

172 High-frequency dipole and other doublet antennas
A counterpoise ground is a structure that acts like a ground, but is actually electrically floating above real ground (and it is not connected to ground). A groundplane
of radials is sometimes used as a counterpoise ground for vertical antennas that are
mounted above actual earth ground. In fact, these antennas are often called ground
plane verticals. In those antennas, the array of four (or more) radials from the shield
of the coaxial cable are used as an artificial, or counterpoise, ground system.
In the counterpoise longwire of Fig. 6-25A, there are two counterpoise grounds
(although, for one reason or another, you might elect to use either, but not both).
One counterpoise is at the feedpoint, where it connects to the “cold” side of the
transmission line. The parallel line is then routed to an antenna tuning unit (ATU),
and from there to the transmitter. The other counterpoise is from the cold end of the
termination resistor to the support insulator. This second counterpoise makes it
possible to eliminate the earth ground connection, and all the problems that it might
entail, especially in the higher end of the HF spectrum, where the wire to ground is
of substantial length compared with 1λ of the operating frequency.
A slightly different scheme used to adapt the antenna to coaxial cable is shown
in Fig. 6-25B. In this case, the longwire is a resonant type (nonterminated). Normally, one would expect to find this antenna fed with 450-Ω parallel transmission
line. But with a λ/4 radial acting as a counterpoise, a 4:1 balun transformer can be
used to effect a reasonable match to 75-Ω coaxial cable. The radial is connected to
the side of the balun that is also connected to the coaxial cable shield, and the other
side of the balun is connected to the radiator element.

7

CHAPTER

Vertically polarized
HF antennas
IN PREVIOUS CHAPTERS, YOU HAVE FOUND THAT THE POLARITY OF AN ANTENNA IS THE

direction of the electrical (E) field. Because the transmitted signal is an orthogonal
electromagnetic wave, the magnetic field radiated from the antenna is at right angles
to the electric field. The direction of the electric field, which sets the polarity of the
antenna, is a function of the geometry of the radiator element. If the element is vertical, then the antenna polarity is also vertical. The signal propagates out from the radiator in all directions of azimuth, making this antenna an “omnidirectional” radiator.
Figure 7-1A shows the basic geometry of the vertical antenna: an RF generator (transmitter or transmission line from a transmitter) at the base of a radiator of
length L. Although most commonly encountered verticals are quarter-wavelength
(L = λ/4), that length is not the only permissible length. In fact, it may not even be
the most desirable length. This chapter covers the standard quarter-wavelength
vertical antenna (because it is so popular), and other-length verticals (both
greater and less than quarter-wavelength).
The quarter-wavelength vertical antenna is basically half of a dipole placed vertically, with the “other half” of the dipole being the ground. Because of this fact,
some texts show the vertical with a double-line ghost radiator, or image antenna, in
the earth beneath the main antenna element. Figure 7-1B shows the current and
voltage distribution for the quarter-wavelength vertical. Like the dipole, the quarterwavelength vertical is fed at a current loop, so the feedpoint impedance is at a minimum (typically 2 to 37 Ω, depending upon nearby objects and design). As a result,
the current is maximum and the voltage is minimum at the feedpoint. As you will
see, however, not all vertical antennas are fed directly at the current loop. As a
result, some designs require antenna tuning units to make them match the antenna
impedance to the transmitter output impedance.
Figure 7-1C and 7-1D show the two basic configurations for the HF vertical
antenna. Figure 7-1C shows the ground-mounted vertical antenna. The radiator
Copyright 2001 - the McGraw-Hill Companies

173

Chap07_Carr

4/10/01

2:49 PM

Page 174

174 Vertically polarized HF antennas

L

Volta

ge

7-1A Basic elements of the
vertical antenna.

Curre

nt

7-1B Current and voltage
distribution along
vertical.

Max
Min

4/10/01

2:49 PM

Page 175

Vertically polarized HF antennas 175

/ Radiator
4

7-1C Simple coaxial-fed vertical
antenna. There is a slight
mismatch, but it usually is
within tolerable limits.

Coax to
XMTR

7-1D Mast-mounted vertical
uses radials as a
counterpoise ground.

/ Radiator
4

Chap07_Carr

Transmission
line

/ Radials
4

element is mounted at ground level, but it is insulated from ground. Because the
antenna shown is a quarter-wavelength, it is fed at a current loop with 52-Ω coaxial
cable. The inner conductor of the coaxial cable is connected to the radiator element,
and the coaxial cable shield is connected to the ground. As you will see shortly,
the ground system for the vertical antenna is critical to its performance. Normally, the
feedpoint impedance is not 52 Ω, but rather is somewhat lower (37 Ω). As a

Chap07_Carr

4/10/01

2:49 PM

Page 176

176 Vertically polarized HF antennas
result, without some matching there will be a slight VSWR, but in most cases, the
VSWR is a tolerable tradeoff for simplicity. If the antenna has a feedpoint impedance
of 37 Ω, which is the value usually quoted, then the VSWR will be 52 Ω/37 Ω, or 1.41:1.
A vertical mounted above the ground level is shown in Fig. 7-1D. This antenna
is equally as popular as the ground mounted. Amateurs and CB operators find it
easy to construct this form of antenna because the lightweight vertical can be
mounted at reasonable heights (15 to 60 ft) using television antenna slip-up telescoping masts that are reasonably low in cost. A problem with the non-ground-level
vertical antenna is that there is no easy way to connect it to ground. The solution to
the problem is to create a counterpoise (artificial) ground with a system of quarterwavelength radials.
In general, at least two radials are required for each band, and even that number
is marginal. The standard wisdom holds that the greater the number of radials, the better the performance. Although that statement is true, there are both theoretical and
practical limits to the number of radials. The theoretical limit is derived from the fact
that more than 120 radials returns practically no increase in operational effectiveness,
and at more than 16 radials, the returned added effectiveness per new radial is less
than is the case for fewer radials. That is, going from 16 to 32 radials (doubling the
number) creates less of an increase in received field strength at a distant point than
going from 8 to 16 radials (both represent doubling the density of the radial system).
The practical limit is 16 radials.
The radials of the off-ground-level vertical antenna can be at any angle. In Fig.
7-1D, they are “drooping radials” (i.e., the angle is greater than 90° relative to the vertical radiator element). Similarly, Fig. 7-1E shows a vertical antenna that is equipped
with radials at exactly 90° (no common antenna has radials less than 90°). Both of
these antennas are called ground plane vertical antennas.
The angle of the vertical’s radials is said to affect the feedpoint impedance and
the angle of radiation of the vertical antenna. Although those statements are undoubtedly true in some sense, there are other factors that also affect those parameters, and they are probably more important in most practical installations.
Before digging further into the subject of vertical antennas, take a look at the subjects of angle of radiation and gain in vertical antennas.

Angle of radiation
Long-distance propagation in the HF region depends upon the ionospheric phenomena called “skip.” (See Chap. 2 for a more extensive explanation.) In this type
of propagation, the signal leaves the transmitting antenna at some angle a, called
the angle of radiation, and enters the ionosphere where it is refracted back to
earth at a distance D from the transmitting station. The signal in the zone between
the outer edge of the antenna’s ground-wave region and the distant skip point is
weak or nonexistent.
The distance covered by the signal on each skip is a function of the angle of radiation. Figure 7-2 shows a plot of the angle of radiation of the antenna, and the distance to the first skip zone. The angle referred to along the vertical axis is the angle
of radiation away from the antenna relative to the horizon. For example, an angle of

Chap07_Carr

4/10/01

2:49 PM

Page 177

Angle of radiation 177

Quarter-wave
vertical radiator

Insulator

Quarter-wave
ground-plane rods
Coaxial
transmission
line

Ground-plane antenna

Ground-plane antenna
Horizontal plane

Radiation pattern
7-1E Ground-plane vertical antenna.

Chap07_Carr

4/10/01

2:49 PM

Page 178

178 Vertically polarized HF antennas

90

80

70

Radiation angle (degrees)

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

500

1000

1500

2000

2500

3000

3500

4000

Distance to first reflection (miles)
7-2 Effect of radiation angle on skip communications.

10° is elevated 10° above the horizon. Shorter distances are found when the angle of
radiation is increased. At an angle of about 30°, for example, the distance per skip is
only a few hundred miles.
Although you might expect on first blush to see a single line on the graph, there is
actually a zone shown (shaded). This phenomenon exists because the ionosphere
is found at different altitudes at different times of the day and different seasons of
the year. Generally, however, in the absence of special event phenomena in the
ionosphere, you can expect from 1500 to 2500 mi per bounce in the HF bands for low
angles of radiation. Note, for example, that for a signal that is only a degree or two
above the horizon the skip distance is maximum.

Chap07_Carr

4/10/01

2:49 PM

Page 179

Gain in vertical antennas 179
At distances greater than those shown in Fig. 7-2, the signal will make multiple
hops. Given a situation where the skip distance is 2500 mi, covering a distance of
7500 mi requires three hops. Unfortunately, there is a signal strength loss on each
hop of 3 to 6 dB, so you can expect the distant signal to be attenuated from making
multiple hops between the earth’s surface and the ionosphere. For maximizing distance, therefore, the angle of radiation needs to be minimized.
So what is the ideal angle of radiation? It is standard—but actually erroneous—
wisdom among amateur radio operators (and even commercial operators, it turns
out) that the lower the angle of radiation, the better the antenna. That statement is
only true if long distance is wanted, so it reflects a strong bias toward the DX community. The correct answer to the question is: “It depends on where you want the
signal to go.” For example, I live in Virginia. If I want to communicate with stations
in the Carolinas or New England, then it would behoove me to select a higher angle
of radiation for radio conditions represented in Fig. 7-2 so that the signal will land
in those regions. But if I wanted to work stations in Europe or Africa or South America, then a low angle of radiation is required. Because of the difference between
performance of high and low angles of radiation, some stations have two antennas
for each band: one each for high and low angles of radiation.
Figure 7-3 shows a signal from a hypothetical antenna located at point 0, in order to show what angle is meant by “angle of radiation.” The beam from the antenna
is elevated above the horizon (represented by the horizontal “tangent to horizon”
line). The angle of radiation a is the angle between the tangent line and the center
of the beam. This angle is not to be confused with the beamwidth, which is also an
angle. In the case of beamwidth, we are talking about the thickness of the main lobe
of the signal between points where the field strength is –3 dB down from the maximum signal (which occurs at point P); these points are represented by points X and
Y in Fig. 7-3. Thus, angle b is the beamwidth, and angle a is the angle of radiation.

Gain in vertical antennas
Vertical antennas are considered omnidirectional because they radiate equally
well in all directions. “Gain” in an antenna is not the creation of power, but rather a
simple refocusing of energy from all directions to a specific direction; gain therefore
infers directivity. According to the convention, then, the vertical antenna cannot
have any gain because it radiates in all directions equally . . . gain infers directivity.
Right? No, not really. Let’s develop the theme more carefully.
Again consider the idea of an isotropic radiator (the word isotropic means
equal power in all directions). Consider a spherical point source radiator located at
point O in Fig. 7-4. Whatever the level of power available from the transmitter, it will
be spread equally well over the entire surface of the sphere as it radiates out into
space away from point O. If you measure the power distributed over some area A at
a distance R from the source, then the power available will be a fraction of the total
power:
total available power × A
Pavail = 
total surface area of sphere

Chap07_Carr

4/10/01

2:49 PM

Page 180

180 Vertically polarized HF antennas
Y
P
b

X

a
Tangent to horizon
O

X,Y: 3 dB points
P: center beam
Angle a: elevation angle
Angle b: 3-dB beam width

7-3 Side view of vertical extent radiation pattern.

or, in math symbols:
Ps
Pa = 
4πr2

[7.1]

where
Pa is the power available per solid degree
Ps is the total radiated power, in watts
r is the radius of the sphere (i.e., the distance from O to P ).
A practical rule of thumb for this problem is to calculate from the surface area of the
sphere. If you perform the right calculations, you will find that there are approximately
41,253 square degrees on the surface of a sphere. By calculating the surface area of the
beam front (also in square degrees), you can find the power within that region.
Now for the matter of gain in a vertical antenna. The vertical is not gainless because it does not, in fact, radiate equally well in all directions. In fact, the vertical is
quite directional, except in the horizontal (azimuth) plane. Figure 7-5 shows the radiation pattern of the typical free-space vertical radiator. The pattern looks like a giant doughnut in free space (see solid pattern in Fig. 7-5). When sliced like a bagel,
the pattern is the familiar circular “omnidirectional” pattern. When examined in the
vertical plane, however, the plane looks like a sliced figure-8. The “gain” comes from
the fact that energy is not spread over an entire sphere, but rather it is concentrated

Chap07_Carr

4/10/01

2:49 PM

Page 181

Non-quarter-wavelength verticals 181
Y

X

X
Z

b

R
Y

a
O

Z
X

Y

7-4 Spherical or “isotropic” radiation pattern.

to the toroidal doughnut-shaped region shown. Therefore, the power per unit area
is greater than for the isotropic (truly omnidirectional) case.

Non-quarter-wavelength verticals
The angle of radiation for a vertical antenna, hence the shape of the hypothetical
doughnut radiation pattern, is a function of the length of the antenna. (Note: Length
in terms of vertical antennas is the same as height, and is sometimes expressed in
degrees of wavelength, as well as feet and/or meters.) Figure 7-6A shows the approximate patterns for three different-length vertical antennas: quarter-wavelength,
half-wavelength, and 5⁄8-wavelength. Note that the quarter-wavelength antenna
has the highest angle of radiation, as well as the lowest gain of the three cases.

Chap07_Carr

4/10/01

2:49 PM

Page 182

182 Vertically polarized HF antennas
Horizontal
polar
pattern

Antenna

Horizontal
plane
Null

Antenna
(inside)

Solid
pattern

Vertical
pattern

Lobe

Vertical
plane

Null

7-5 Vertical antenna radiation pattern.

5

8



2



4

7-6A Vertical radiation pattern as a function of element length: Ideal.

Lobe

Chap07_Carr

4/10/01

2:49 PM

Page 183

Non-quarter-wavelength verticals 183
The 5⁄8-wavelength antenna is both the lowest angle of radiation and the highest gain
(compared with isotropic).
The patterns shown in Fig. 7-6A assume a perfectly conducting ground underneath the antenna. However, that is not a possible situation for practical antennas;
all real grounds are lossy. The effect of ground losses is to pull in the pattern close
to the ground (Fig. 7-6B). Although all of the patterns are elevated from those of
Fig. 7-6A, the relationships still remain: the 5⁄8-wavelength radiator has the lowest
angle of radiation and highest gain.
The feedpoint impedance of a vertical antenna is a function of the length of the
radiator. For the standard quarter-wavelength antenna, the feedpoint radiation resistance is a maximum of 37 Ω, with only a very small reactance component. Figure
7-7 shows the approximate feedpoint impedances for antennas from nearly zero
effective length to 120° of length.
Antenna length expressed in degrees derives from the fact that one wavelength
is 360°. Thus, a quarter-wavelength antenna has a length of 360°/4 = 90°. To convert
any specific length from degrees to wavelength, divide the length in degrees by 360.
Thus, for a 90° antenna: 90°/360° = 1⁄4 wavelength. The graph in Fig. 7-7A shows the
antenna feedpoint impedance, both reactance and radiation resistance, for antennas
from 60 to 120°; Fig. 7-7B shows the radiation resistance for antennas from near zero
to 60°. Note that the radiation resistance for such short antennas is extremely small.
For example, an antenna that is 30° long ( 30⁄360 = 0.083 wavelengths) has a resistance
of approximately 3 Ω. It is generally the practice on such antennas to use a broadband
impedance-matching transformer to raise the impedance of such antennas to a higher
value (Fig. 7-8).



2


4

5
8

a

7-6B Accounting for ground losses.

Chap07_Carr

4/10/01

2:49 PM

Page 184

184 Vertically polarized HF antennas
XL

Ro

400

200

300

150

200

100

100

50

0

0

Radiation
resistance

37 

Reactance

100

200

300



XC

60

70

80

4

90

100

Antenna length
(degrees)

7-7A Antenna impedance as a function of antenna length.

110

120

4/10/01

2:49 PM

Page 185

The ground system for the vertical antenna 185
12
11
10
9

Radiation resistance (Ro)

Chap07_Carr

8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1



0

10

20



16

30

8

40

50

60

Antenna length (degrees)
7-7B Radiation resistance as a function of antenna length.

The ground system for the vertical antenna
The vertical antenna works well only when placed over a good ground system. Chapter 28 gives details of proper ground systems for all radio antennas, verticals included, so only certain specifics are included here. The reader should also examine
Chap. 28, however, in order to get a firmer grasp of the problem.
The usual way to provide a good ground for a vertical is to use a system of radials such as Fig. 7-9A. This case shows a view (from above) of 16 quarter-wavelength
radials arranged to cover the full circle around the antenna. Each radial is a quarterwavelength, so it will have a length (in fact) of 246/FMHz. All of the radials are
connected together at the base of the antenna, and the ground side of the transmission line is connected to this system. The radials can be placed either on the surface or underground. One friend of the author built an extensive radial system on
the bare dirt when his house was built, so when the sod was installed he had a very
high-quality underground radial system.

Chap07_Carr

4/10/01

2:49 PM

Page 186

186 Vertically polarized HF antennas

<4

7-8 Impedance matching through
broadband transformer.

Coax to
transmitter
Broadband
RF matching
transformer

If you decide to use an aboveground radial system, however, be sure to prevent
people from tripping over it. There might be liability implications for people who
trip and injure themselves, even when the person is an intruder or trespasser.
Some experts prefer to place a copper wire screen at the center of the radial
system. The minimum size of this screen is about 2m square (6 × 6 ft). Connect it
to the radials at the points shown using solder. Other experts will drive ground
stakes into the ground at these points. Still another method is shown in Fig. 7-9B.
This case shows a “spider web” of conductors shorting the radials at points a meter
or two from the antenna. Again, some authorities recommend that ground rods be
driven into the earth at the indicated points.
The exact number of radials to use depends in part on practical matters (how
many can you physically install?). Use at least two radials per band, with four per
band preferred for simple, low-cost systems. However, even four is considered a
compromise case. The general rule is: the more the better. But it’s also true that
there is a law of diminishing returns as the number of radials is increased. Figure
7-9C shows the approximate field intensity (mV/m) as a function of the number of
radials. Notice that the field intensity does not increase as rapidly with the number
of radials above 20 or so. Note that the Federal Communications Commission requires AM band (550 to 1700 kHz) stations to use 120 radials, but that number is not
necessary for amateur stations. A practical upper limit of 16 radials is usually accepted for amateur radio work, and four radials work quite well.

Chap07_Carr

4/10/01

2:50 PM

Page 187

Variations on the vertical antenna theme 187

2-Meter
screen

7-9A Comprehensive ground system for vertical antenna.

For vertical antennas mounted above ground, there is an optimum height above
ground for the base of the antenna. This height is a quarter-wavelength above the
actual ground plane. Unfortunately, that distance might not be the height above
the surface. Depending upon ground conductivity and groundwater content, the
height can be exactly a quarter-wavelength above the surface or slightly lower. The
point is found from experimentation, and will, unfortunately, vary over the year if
climatic changes are usual.

Variations on the vertical antenna theme
Thus far, the vertical antennas have been standard quarter- or 5⁄8-wavelength models.
This section looks at several variations on the theme. Consider Fig. 7-10. This antenna
is the vertical half-wavelength dipole. The vertical dipole is constructed in exactly the

Chap07_Carr

4/10/01

2:50 PM

Page 188

188 Vertically polarized HF antennas

7-9B “Spider web” ground system.

same manner as the horizontal dipole, but is mounted in the vertical plane. In general,
the section of the radiator that is closest to the ground should be connected to the
shield end of the coaxial cable transmission line.
Like the horizontal dipole, the approximate length of the vertical dipole is calculated from
468
Lft = 
FMHz

[7.2]

where
Lft is the length, in feet
FMHz is the operating frequency, in megahertz
Example Calculate the length of a half-wavelength vertical dipole for operation on a frequency of 14.250 MHz in the 20-m amateur radio band.

4/10/01

2:50 PM

Page 189

Variations on the vertical antenna theme 189

190

Field intensity (mV/m)

Chap07_Carr

170
150

130

120

100
10

0

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

Number of radials
7-9C Effect of increasing the number of radials on field strength.

Solution:
468
Lft = 
FMHz
468
Lft =  = 32.8 ft
14.250
Note: The 0.8 ft part of this calculated length can be converted to inches by
multiplying by 12: 0.8 × 12 = 9.6 in.
Each leg of the vertical dipole is one half of the calculated length, or
32.8 ft
 = 16.4 ft
2
The vertical dipole antenna is used in many locations where it is impossible to
properly mount a horizontal dipole, or where a roof- or mast-mounted antenna is
impossible to install because of logistics, a hostile landlord, and/or a homeowners’
association. Some row house and town house dwellers, for example, have been successful with the vertical dipole. In the 1950s and 1960s, the vertical dipole was popular among European amateurs because of space restrictions found in many of
those locations.
The construction of the vertical dipole is relatively straightforward. You must
find or build a vertical support structure. In the case shown in Fig. 7-10, the support

Chap07_Carr

4/10/01

2:50 PM

Page 190

190 Vertically polarized HF antennas



4

Coax
to XMTR

7-10 Vertical half-wavelength dipole
antenna.

Support



4

is a wooden or PVC mast erected for that purpose. Ropes and insulators at either
end support the wire elements from the ends and keep the antenna taut. If the
neighbors are a problem, then try to find some white PVC pipe that will make a fine
flagpole and be patriotic—with a vertical dipole hidden inside of the pipe. In other
cases, if your home is not metal-sided, and if it is high enough, then a support from
the roof structure (or soffits) will make a proper mount.

Chap07_Carr

4/10/01

2:50 PM

Page 191

Variations on the vertical antenna theme 191
One problem with the vertical dipole, and one that liability-conscious people
need to consider, is that a high-impedance current node is found at the ends of a
half- wavelength dipole. Anyone touching the antenna will likely receive a nasty RF
burn (or shock) from this antenna.
A coaxial vertical is similar to the vertical dipole (and, in fact, it can be argued
that it is a form of vertical dipole) in that it uses a pair of vertical radiator elements.
In the case of the coaxial vertical antenna, however, the radiator that is closest to
the ground is coaxial with the transmission line and the main radiator element. An
example is shown in Fig. 7-11A. An insulator at the feedpoint separates the two
halves of the radiator; in most cases, it is of smaller diameter than the coaxial sleeve
(also called the shield pipe in some publications). The reasons for this arrangement are not entirely electrical, for the most part, but mechanical. The coaxial cable transmission line passes through the sleeve, and is itself coaxial to the sleeve.
The overall length of the coaxial vertical antenna is a half-wavelength, which
consists of two quarter-wavelength sections. Both the radiator and the sleeve are
quarter-wavelength. The length of each is found (approximately) from
234
Lft = 
FMHz

[7.3]

72
Lmeters = 
FMHz

[7.4]

or

You should recognize these as similar to the equation used previously to calculate
half-wavelength antennas, but reduced by a factor of 2.
The coaxial vertical antenna was once popular with CB operators, and as such
was called the collinear antenna. In some cases, you can find hardware from these
antennas on the hamfest or surplus markets, and the pieces can be modified for
amateur radio use. In the situation where a 10-m-band antenna is being built, it is a
simple matter to cut the 11-m CB antenna for operation on a slightly higher frequency. In the case of the lower-frequency bands, however, it is a little more difficult and it is likely that only the insulator and mounting assembly are salvageable.
Keep in mind, however, the fact that adjacent sizes of aluminum tubing are designed such that the inside diameter ( ID) of the larger piece is a slip-fit for the outside diameter (OD) of the smaller piece. You can, therefore, connect adjacent sizes
of aluminum tubing together without the need for special couplers, etc. With that in
mind, salvaged insulator assemblies can be cut off with just 6 to 10 in of the former
radiator and sleeve, and new radiators from “adjacent size” tubing installed.
The configuration shown in Fig. 7-11A is the manner of construction used by
commercial antenna manufacturers for VHF and CB collinear vertical dipoles, but is
a little difficult for amateurs (unless they happen to own a machine shop) to make
the center insulator. For those people, some other method is indicated before this
antenna is practical.

Chap07_Carr

4/10/01

2:50 PM

Page 192

192 Vertically polarized HF antennas


4
Antenna

Insulator

7-11A Construction of the
vertical coaxial
antenna.

L=4

Figure 7-11B shows a construction method that has been used by amateurs
with good results. The radiator and shield pipe (sleeve) are joined together in an insulating piece of thick-wall PVC plumbing pipe, Lucite, or plexiglass tubing; 6 to 10
in of tubing are needed.
A gap of about 2 in is left between the bottom end of the radiator pipe and the
top end of the shield pipe in order to keep them electrically insulated from each

Chap07_Carr

4/10/01

2:50 PM

Page 193

Variations on the vertical antenna theme 193

Radiator

Insulator

7-11B Vertical dipole
made from tubing.

Sleeve

other, and to allow the coaxial cable to be passed through to the outside world. A
hole in the insulator pipe is drilled for this purpose.
The aluminum tubing pieces for the radiator and the sleeve are fastened to the
insulator with at least two heavy machine screws each. One of the machine screws on
each can be used as the electrical connection between the coaxial cable and the pipes,
provided that a larger hole is cut in the insulator at that point to admit the washer
that provides the electrical pathway between the screw head and the aluminum pipe.

Chap07_Carr

4/10/01

2:50 PM

Page 194

194 Vertically polarized HF antennas
If you depend upon the machine screw touching the pipe at the edges of the hole cut
for it, then there will probably be intermittent connection and all of the aggravation
that ensues.
Mounting of the homebrew coaxial vertical antenna can be a “pain in the neck.”
Normally, this antenna is mounted high in the air above ground, so some form of support is needed. Fortunately, you can use small-area metal supports connected to the
sleeve for this purpose. Figure 7-11C shows one method for mounting that is popular. A pair of television antenna standoff mounting brackets are used to support the
sleeve. Those brackets can be bought in sizes from 6 to 24 in. Note that a 2 × 4 piece
of lumber is used between the building wall and the brackets. This wood serves as an

op
radiator

Center
insulator
Coax

Wall
Bottom
radiator

7-11C Mast mounting system for verticals.
24

TV antenna
stand-off
brackets

Chap07_Carr

4/10/01

2:50 PM

Page 195

Vertical antenna construction 195
insulator, so it should be varnished or painted. It is held to the wall with lag bolts,
wing bolts, or some other effective method of anchoring. Keep in mind that the
forces on the brackets increase tremendously during wind storms!
It is possible for the two vertical antennas shown previously to become a shock
hazard to anyone who touches them. Both of these antennas are half-wavelength
radiators and are of the dipole form of construction. The center point is used for
feeding the antenna, so it forms the low-impedance point in the antenna. As a
result, the ends of the antenna, one of which is close to the ground, are the highimpedance points—hence the voltages at those points within reach of prying hands
playing in the yard can be high. It is wise to either mount the antennas so far above
the ground that they cannot be reached, or build a small nonconductive fence
around the bottom end of the antenna.

Vertical antenna construction
There are two general cases for installing vertical antennas: ground-level-mounted and
non-ground-mounted. This section takes a brief look at both forms of mounting. We will
concentrate on installation of homebrew verticals rather than commercial, because it is
assumed that the vendors of such antennas will provide their own instructions.
The ground-level-mounted vertical is shown in Fig. 7-12. The typical vertical antenna is 8 to 40 ft high. Thus, although the actual weight of the antenna is small, the
forces applied to the mounting structure (especially during windstorms) can be quite
high. Don’t be fooled by the apparent light weight of the antenna in this respect.
The mounting structure for the vertical antenna can be a metal or wooden
fence post buried in the ground. At least 2 ft of the fence post should be above
ground. In the case of Fig. 7-12, a 4 × 4 wooden fence post is used as the mounting, but the principles are similar for all forms of post. A fence post hole is provided that is at least 2 ft deep. In some cases, it might be possible to use a
1-ft-deep gravel fill topped with back-filled dirt. In other cases, especially where
a steel fence post is used, a concrete plug is placed at the bottom of the hole
over a 4-in layer of gravel.
The antenna radiator element is installed onto the fence post using standoff
insulators. Unfortunately, these insulators are difficult to find, so they might have to
be omitted. Given that varnished or painted wood is not a terribly good conductor,
it is not unreasonable to bolt the radiator directly to the 4 × 4 fence post. Use 5⁄16-in
(or larger) bolts, and make them long enough to fit completely through both the antenna element and the 4 × 4 post. Thus, 6-in-, 7-in-, or 8-in-long 5⁄16-in bolts are the
candidates for this job. Use at least two bolts, one at the bottom of the antenna
radiator element, and one near the top of the fence post. A third bolt, halfway between the other two, would not be out of order.
If the antenna is quarter-wavelength, then no matching is generally necessary.
Although the feedpoint impedance is not exactly 52 Ω, it is close enough (37 Ω) to
form a reasonable match for 52-Ω coaxial cable (with VSWR = 1.4:1). The center
conductor of the coaxial cable is connected to the radiator element, while the shield
is connected to the ground system. In the example shown in Fig. 7-12, two ground
methods are used. First, an 8-ft ground rod is driven into the earth at the base of the

Chap07_Carr

4/10/01

2:50 PM

Page 196

196 Vertically polarized HF antennas

Radiator
element

Standoff
insulators
Treated
44 fence post
Coax to
XMTR

Ground level

Back fill

 radial
4

> 2 ft

Gravel

Ground rod
(8 ft)

7-12 Ground-mounted vertical.

Chap07_Carr

4/10/01

2:50 PM

Page 197

⁄8-Wavelength verticals 197

5

antenna; second, a system of quarter-wavelength radials is used. Remember that
the ground system is absolutely essential.
A method for installing a vertical antenna above ground is shown in Fig. 7-13.
In this case, a wooden support (2 × 4 or 4 × 4) is installed in a manner similar to Fig.
7-12, but with a deeper hole to counter the longer length. Alternatively, the wooden
support is affixed to the side of a building wall, shed, or other preexisting structure.
Once the support is arranged, however, the method of attachment of the radiator
element is the same for the previous case, so that will not be repeated here.
Electrical connections to the antenna are also shown in Fig. 7-13. Because the
antenna is above ground level, an electrical counterpoise ground consisting of a system of radials is absolutely essential; at least two radials per band must be provided.
A small L bracket is used to support the radials and to provide an SO-239 coaxial
connector for the coax. This connector is a chassis-mounted type with its center
conductor connected to the radiator element. The shield of the connector is connected to the bracket, so it is also connected to the radial system.
In some installations, the antenna support structure will require guy wires to
keep the structure stable. Do not use the radials as guy wires. The type of wire that
normally works well for radials is too soft, and too easily stretched, for guy wire service. Use regular steel guy line, available where TV antenna supplies are sold, for
this antenna. Make the lengths nonresonant, and break the guy lines up with egg insulators, if necessary, to achieve the nonresonance.

⁄8-Wavelength verticals

5

Figure 7-14 shows the configuration for the 5⁄8-wavelength vertical antenna. Such an
antenna generally gives a lower angle of radiation than the more common quarterwavelength radiator, so presumably it works better for long distance.
The radiator of this antenna is made from 0.5-in to 1.5-in aluminum tubing.
Again, remember that adjacent sizes fit together snugly to form longer sections.
The physical length of the 5⁄8-wavelength radiator is found from
585
Lft = 
FMHz

[7.5]

180
Lmeters = 
FMHz

[7.6]

or, in meters,

The radials are the usual quarter-wavelength, and are made of no. 12 or no. 14
copper wire. These lengths are found from:
246
Lft = 
FMHz

[7.7]

Chap07_Carr

4/10/01

2:50 PM

Page 198

198 Vertically polarized HF antennas

Stand-off
insulators

Radiator
element

Wooden
support

Metal
bracket

Radials

7-13 Details of feedpoint circuit on vertical.

Chap07_Carr

4/10/01

2:50 PM

Page 199

⁄8-Wavelength verticals 199

5

Radiator
element
5

8

L1


4

L2


4


8 Radials

Coax to
XMTR
7-14 Using a Q section to match the feedpoint impedance of a vertical antenna.

or, in meters,
75
Lmeters = 
FMHz

[7.8]

The feedpoint impedance of the 5⁄8-wavelength antenna is about 1600 Ω, not a
good match for the ordinary coaxial cables that are routinely available on the amateur market. Some form of impedance matching is needed.
One option is to use a broadbanded RF transformer. These transformers will
work throughout the HF spectrum, and match a wide variety of impedances to the
50-Ω standard system impedance.
Another option, especially for a single-band antenna, is to use a coaxial cable
impedance transformer, such as shown in Fig. 7-14. The transformer consists of two
sections of coaxial cable joined together, shown as L1 and L 2 in Fig. 7-14. The
lengths are found from
122
L1 =  ft
FMHz

[7.9]

Chap07_Carr

4/10/01

2:50 PM

Page 200

200 Vertically polarized HF antennas
or
38
L1 =  m
FMHz

[7.10]

and
30
L2 =  ft
FMHz
9
L2 =  m
FMHz

[7.11]
[7.12]

Grounded vertical antennas
The vertical antennas presented thus far in this chapter are called series-fed verticals, because the generator is essentially in series with the radiator element. Such
an antenna must be insulated from ground. The other class of vertical is the shuntfed vertical, which is grounded at one end (Fig. 7-15). There are three methods of
shunt-feeding a grounded vertical antenna: delta, gamma, and omega. All three
matching systems have exactly the same function: to form an impedance transformation between the antenna radiation resistance, at the feedpoint, and the coaxial
cable characteristic impedance, as well as cancelling any reactance in the system.
The delta feed system is shown in Fig. 7-15A. In this case, a taut feed wire is connected between a point on the antenna, which represents a specific impedance on

7-15A Delta-fed grounded vertical.

Coax
to
XMTR

Tuner

Chap07_Carr

4/10/01

2:50 PM

Page 201

Conclusion 201
the antenna, and an antenna tuner. This method of feed is common on AM broadcast
antennas (which are usually—perhaps always—verticals). Although you would
think that the sloping feed wire would distort the pattern, that is not the case. The
distortion of the pattern, if any, is minimal, hence it can be neglected.
The gamma feed system is shown in Fig. 7-15B. This method is commonly used
by amateurs to feed Yagi beam antennas, so it is quite familiar in the amateur radio
world. The feed system consists of a variable capacitor to tune the system, and a
matching rod that parallels the antenna radiator element. It is important that the
rod not be anywhere near a quarter-wavelength, or it would become a vertical
antenna in its own right, and in fact would resemble the so-called J-pole antenna.
A review of the gamma match is given in Chap. 12. The omega feed (shown in Fig.
7-15C) is similar to the gamma match except that a shunt capacitor is used.

Conclusion
The vertical antenna is a viable alternative for many situations, especially where
real estate is at a premium. Contrary to popular opinion, the vertical antenna works
well when installed properly and when due consideration has been given to matters
such as the grounding and angle of radiation desired.

7-15B Gamma-fed grounded vertical.
Shorting
bar

C1
Coax
to XMTR

Chap07_Carr

4/10/01

2:50 PM

Page 202

202 Vertically polarized HF antennas

7-15C Omega-fed grounded vertical.

C2
C1

8

CHAPTER

Multiband and
tunable-wire antennas
MOST COMMUNICATIONS OPERATORS REQUIRE MORE THAN ONE BAND, AND THAT MAKES

the antenna problem exactly that—a problem to be solved. Amateur radio, commercial, and military operators are especially likely to need either multiple antennas for
different bands, or a multiband antenna that operates on any number of different
bands. This situation is especially likely on the high-frequency (HF) bands from 3.5
to 29.7 MHz.
Another problem regards the tunability of an antenna. Some amateur bands are
very wide (several hundred kilohertz), and that causes any antenna to be highly variable from one end of the band to another. It is typical for amateurs to design an antenna for the portion of the band that they use most often, and then tolerate a high
VSWR at the other frequencies. Unfortunately, when you see an antenna that seems
to offer a low VSWR over such a wide range, it is almost certain that some problem
exists that reduces the Q, and the antenna efficiency, to broaden the response. However, it is possible to tune an antenna for a wide band. It is also possible (now that
amateurs have new HF bands) to use a single antenna between them, and then tune
the difference out. For example, designing a single antenna for 21/24 MHz, 14/18
MHz, or 7/10 MHz should prove possible.
In this chapter we will take a look at both problems: the multiband and the tunable antenna.

Multiband antennas
Although a triband Yagi or quad beam antenna will undoubtedly work better than a
wire antenna (when installed correctly!), the low-budget amateur operator need not
lament any supposed inability to “get out” on wire antennas. To quote an old saying:
“‘Better’ is the enemy of ‘good enough.’” Or, to put it in terms of Carr’s law: “If it’s
‘good enough’ then don’t waste a lot of energy fretting over making it ‘better’ unless
you really want to make it a lot better.”
Copyright 2001 - the McGraw-Hill Companies

203

Chap08_Carr

4/10/01

2:48 PM

Page 204

204 Multiband and tunable-wire antennas

Trap dipoles
Perhaps the most common form of multiband wire antenna is the trap dipole
shown in Fig. 8-1A. In this type of antenna, one (or more) pairs of parallel resonant
traps are placed in series with the quarter-wavelength elements of the dipole. The
purpose of the traps is to block their own resonant frequency, while passing all
other frequencies.
In the example of Fig. 8-1A, a 10-m trap isolates the first 8 ft or so (quarterwavelength on 10 m) so that the antenna resonates on that band. A 40-m or 15-m
signal, on the other hand, passes through the traps and uses the whole length of the
antenna. (Note: A half-wavelength 40-m dipole works as a 3/2-wavelength antenna
on 15 m.)
The overall length of the trap dipole will be a little less than the natural “nontrap” length for the lowest frequency of operation. At the low frequencies, the
traps add a little inductance to the circuit so that the resonant point is lower than
the natural resonant frequency. In general, most trap dipoles are just a few percent shorter than nontrap dipoles at the same band. The actual amount of shortening depends upon the values of the components in the traps, so consult the
data for each trap purchased. Where more than one pair of traps is used in the
antenna, make sure they are of the same brand and are intended to work
together.
Another solution to this problem is shown in Fig. 8-1B. This type of antenna actually has two or more half-wavelength dipoles fed from the same transmission line.
In this illustration, a total of three dipoles are fed from the same 75-Ω transmission
line. There is no theoretical limit to how many dipoles can be accommodated, although there is certainly a practical limit. For one thing, there is a mechanical limit
to how many wires are supportable (or desirable) hanging from any given support.
There is also an electrical limit, although it is less defined. Having a lot of dipoles increases the possibility of radiating harmonics and other spurious emissions from
your transmitter.
The 75-Ω coaxial cable is connected to the center feedpoint of the multidipole
either directly or through a 1:1 balun transformer, as shown in Fig. 8-1B. Each an-

B

A

A

B

8-1A Trap dipole for multiband
operation. (Courtesy of Hands-On Electronics and
Popular Electronics)

A10-meter segment
A B15-meter/40-meter segment

Chap08_Carr

4/10/01

2:48 PM

Page 205

Trap dipoles 205
1 : 1 BALUN

A

A

B
B
C

Coax to
XMTR
C

8-1B Multiband dipole consists of several dipoles fed from a common feedline.

tenna (A-A, B-B, or C-C) is a half-wavelength. Therefore, the overall length is found
approximately from the standard dipole expressions:
Overall length (A + A, B + B, or C + C):
468
Lft = 
FMHz

[8.1]

or, for each element alone (A, B, or C):
234
Lft = 
FMHz

[8.2]

As always, close to the earth’s surface, these equations are approximations, and
are not to be taken too literally. Some experimentation will probably be necessary to
optimize resonance on each band. Also, be aware that the drooping dipoles (B and C
in this case) may act more like an inverted-vee antenna (see Chap. 7) than a straight
dipole, so the equation length will be just a few percent too short. In any event, a little spritzing with this antenna will yield results.
Some amateurs build the multiple dipole from four- or five-wire TV rotator lead.
That type of wire is used to control antenna rotators, and has either four or five parallel wires in a flat arrangement similar to lamp cord. Cut each wire to the length required for a band, and strip off any unused portions.
Another possibility is the link-tuned dipole shown in Fig. 8-1C. In this situation, a
single conductor is used for each half of the dipole, or actually inverted vee. The conductors are broken into segments A, B, and C (or more, if desired). Each segment is
separated from the two adjacent sections by inline insulators (standard end insulators are suitable). Segment A is a quarter-wavelength on the highest frequency band
of operation, A + B is a quarter-wavelength on the next highest band of operation, and
A + B + C is a quarter-wavelength on the lowest frequency band of operation.
The antenna is “tuned” to a specific band by either connecting, or disconnecting,
a similar wire (see inset) jumper across the insulator that breaks the connection between the segments. Either a switch or an alligator clip jumper will short out the insulator to effectively lengthen the antenna for a lower band. Some amateurs use
single-pole 110-Vac power line switches to jumper the insulator. Although I have not
tried this method, it should work.

Chap08_Carr

4/10/01

2:48 PM

Page 206

206 Multiband and tunable-wire antennas

Alligator
clip
lead

A

A
Coax

B

Wood or
PVC mast

Insulator

B
Links

C

C
Rope

Rope

8-1C Multiband inverted vee uses shorting links to change bands.

A big disadvantage to this type of multiband antenna is that you must go out into
the yard and manually switch the links to change bands, which probably explains
why other antennas are a lot more popular, especially in northern latitudes.

Tuned feeder antennas
Figure 8-2A shows the tuned feeder type of antenna. This antenna can be used from
80 through 10 m, but it requires a special tuner and a length of parallel transmission
line. There are two ways to get parallel transmission line: make it or buy it. Using no.
14 or 12 wire, and specially made insulators (also called spreaders), you can make
300-, 450-, or 600-Ω parallel transmission line. But that's a pain in the ptusch because you can also buy parallel line rather cheaply. I paid $16 for 100 ft of 450-Ω
line recently.
One form of parallel line is ordinary TV-type twin lead, which has an impedance
of 300 Ω. This line will take up to about 250 W, although some people use it at higher
powers (not recommended!). The antenna of Fig. 8-2A uses 450-Ω parallel line. You
can buy insulated 450-Ω twin lead (see Fig. 8-2B) that can be handled as easily as TV
twin lead—and a lot more easily than open (uninsulated) parallel line.

The G5RV multiband dipole
Figure 8-3 shows the popular G5RV antenna. Although not without some problems,
this antenna is very popular. It can be used either as a horizontal dipole, a sloper, or
an inverted-vee antenna (which is how I used it). The dipole elements are each 51 ft
long. The feedline can be either 300- or 450-Ω twin lead. For 300-Ω cases, use 29 ft
of line, and for 450-Ω line, use 34 ft. One end of the parallel transmission line is connected to the antenna, and the other end is connected to a length of 50-Ω coaxial

Chap08_Carr

4/10/01

2:48 PM

Page 207

The G5RV multiband dipole 207
135 Feet
80-10 meter
antenna

450- or 600-
parallel line
(any length)

Balanced
antenna
tuner

Coax

XMTR

A

B

8-2 Tuned feeder antenna can be used on several bands. (Courtesy of Hands-On Electronics and Popular Electronics)

51'

8-3 G5RV antenna.

Twin lead L
(Feet)
Z0
300 
29
450 
34

51'

L

(Courtesy of Hands-On Electronics and Popular Electronics)

50- coax
(any length)

cable. Although most articles on the G5RV claim that any length of 50-Ω line will
work, J. M. Haerle (HF Antenna Systems: The Easy Way) recommends that the
50-Ω segment should be at least 65 ft long.
Haerle is a little caustic in his comments on the G5RV, but his criticism is well
taken. If you don't have a parallel transmatch, then the G5RV will work (especially if
your rig can tolerate a 3:1 VSWR on some selected frequencies). Otherwise, use the
antenna of Fig. 8-2A (or a transmatch with the G5RV).

Chap08_Carr

4/10/01

2:48 PM

Page 208

208 Multiband and tunable-wire antennas
Figure 8-4 shows the once-popular end-fed Zepp antenna. This antenna is a
“monopole” in that it uses a half-wavelength radiator, but it is fed at a voltage loop
rather than a current loop (i.e., the end of the antenna rather than the center). A
450- or 600-Ω parallel transmission line is used to feed the Zepp antenna. Although
the line can theoretically be any length, practicality dictates a quarter-wavelength
because of the fact that the antenna is fed at a high RF voltage point.
The Zepp (as shown) is a single-band antenna unless the transmission line is fed
with a good, widerange transmatch, or other antenna tuner unit. The antenna tuner
required is a balanced type, although a standard transmatch with a 4:1 balun transformer at the output will also work well. Using the Zepp on many bands is easy, but
keep in mind that it is voltage-fed, and (at frequencies for which the parallel line is
not an odd integer multiple of a quarter-wavelength) there will be a high-voltage
node at the transmatch. That raises the possibility of “RF in the shack”—“hot” snippets of RF on the grounded chassis of station equipment (including microphones,
where it is uncomfortable when touched to the lips).

Feeding parallel transmission line
Parallel transmission line is balanced with respect to ground, but coaxial cable is
unbalanced to ground (i.e., one side of the coax is usually grounded). As a result,
the standard amateur transmitter output will not drive parallel (balanced) feedline
properly. You need to do one of two things: (1) buy (or build) an antenna tuner that
is balanced on the output and unbalanced on the input or (2) convert a standard
"coax-to-coax" transmatch or other form of antenna coupler to “coax-to-balanced”
configuration. In some cases you can use a 4:1 balun transformer at the output of the
coaxial cable tuner. Keep in mind, however, that some tuner manufacturers recommend against this practice. If you use the standard tee-network (or SPC) transmatch

Rope

Rope

/2

Insulator

Parallel
feeders

Tuner

VSWR meter

Coax to XMTR

8-4 End-fed Zepp antenna.

Chap08_Carr

4/10/01

2:48 PM

Page 209

Feeding parallel transmission line 209
then it is possible to make a balun for this purpose from some no.12 formvar- or
enamel-covered wire and either a ferrite toroid or a short piece of PVC plumbing
pipe. Figure 8-5 shows a balun coil construction project. Use 12 turns of no.12 formvar or enameled wire over a 1-in outside diameter piece of PVC pipe or tubing.
Next, we have the so-called longwire antenna. I use the term so-called because
not all long wire antennas are truly longwires. A true longwire is longer than two
wavelengths at the lowest frequency of operation. In Fig. 8-6 we see a longwire, or
“random-length,” antenna fed from a tuning unit. If the antenna length L is greater
than a quarter-wavelength, then the tuner consists of a single series capacitor (see
below); and if it is shorter than a quarter-wavelength, the tuner is a series inductor.
The standard tuner for this type of antenna, regardless of length, is a simple L-section coupler (also shown), which can be selected for L-section, series-L or series-C
operation.
The Windom antenna (Fig. 8-7) has been popular since the 1920s. Although
Loren Windom is credited with the design, there were actually a number of contributors. Coworkers with Windom at the University of Illinois were John Byrne, E. F.
Brooke, and W. L. Everett, and they are properly cocredited. The designation of Windom as the inventor was probably due to the publication of the idea (credited to Windom) in the July 1926 issue of QST magazine. Additional (later) contributions were
rendered by G2BI and GM1IAA (Jim MacIntosh). We will continue the tradition of
crediting Loren Windom, with the understanding that others also contributed to this
antenna design.
The Windom is a roughly half-wavelength antenna that will also work on even
harmonics of the fundamental frequency. The basic premise is that the antenna radiation resistance varies from about 50 Ω to about 5000 Ω, depending upon the

Coaxial
output
(disconnect if
parallel line is
connected to
A and B)

Connect only
if parallel line
connected to
A and B
L1

A
8-5 Balun transformer converts
coaxial line to parallel line
feed system.

L2

L3

.

Ceramic
feed-through
insulators

B

Indicates same magnetic
polarity of coil

Chap08_Carr

4/10/01

2:48 PM

Page 210

210 Multiband and tunable-wire antennas

L

Coax

Tuner

L  /4

VSWR meter

L  /4

Transmatch

To XMTR
Random

8-6 Random-length (a.k.a., if erroneously, “longwire”) antenna.

selected feedpoint. When fed in the exact center, a current loop, the feedpoint impedance will be 50 Ω; similarly, end feeding the antenna finds a feedpoint impedance
of about 5000 Ω. In Fig. 8-7A the feedpoint is tapped away from the center at a point
that is about one-third the way from one end, at a point where the impedance is
about 600 Ω.
The Windom antenna works well—but with some caveats. For example, the antenna has a tendency to put “RF in the shack” because of the fact that it is voltagefed. Second, there is some radiation loss from the feedline. Finally, the antenna
works poorly on odd harmonics of the fundamental frequency.
The antenna tuning unit can be either a parallel resonant, link-coupled LC tank
circuit (see inset to Fig. 8-7A); or a reversed pi network. In the case of the Windom,
the pi network is turned around backward from the usual configuration: C1 is at the
low-impedance end of the network, so it is larger than C2. Design a pi network (see
programs at end of book) to match 50 Ω on the transmitter end and 600 Ω on the antenna end.
A reasonable compromise Windom that reduces feedline radiation losses is
shown in Fig. 8-7B. In this antenna a 4:1 balun transformer is placed at the feed
point, and this in turn is connected to 75-Ω coaxial transmission line to the transmitter. A transmatch, or similar antenna tuner, is then connected between the transmitter and the transmission line.

Chap08_Carr

4/10/01

2:48 PM

Page 211

Feeding parallel transmission line 211
Insulator

A  0.18

Insulator

B  0.32

Rope
A  0.18
B  0.32
468
A B  0.50 
Feet
FMHz

Downlead
(#12 or #14)

Coax
to
XMTR

Tuner

Coax
to
XMTR

Ant
— or —
Hi-Z Ant

Lo-Z
XMTR
C1

C2

8-7A Windom antenna.

136'
44.33'
4:1 BALUN

Tuner
8-7B Coaxial-fed Windom.

XMTR

This page intentionally left blank

9

CHAPTER

Longwire
directional antennas
YOU’VE HEARD IT DOZENS OF TIMES: THE RANDOM-LENGTH LONGWIRE ANTENNA IS THE

“perfect” solution to awkward antenna problems. Whether it’s a lack of real estate,
cranky landlords, or a profound lack of dollars, the random-length longwire will do the
job for you. Right? Well, now, that depends on who you ask, and what they did to make
it work— or not work. One person says the longwire is not worth a plugged nickel;
another is very ho-hum about it because his “kinda works”; still another is enthusiastic because hers is installed correctly and it works better than anything “since sliced
pickle and liverwurst sandwiches.” Over the years my various living arrangements
have forced me to use longwires at many QTHs, as well as on Field Day. Why does the
random-length longwire have such a varied reputation? Before we answer that question let’s find out (for those who came in late) just what is a longwire antenna.
As an aside, let me point out that random-length wire antennas (less than 2λ)
are not true longwire antennas. However, common (if erroneous) usage compels
the inclusion of both types.

Longwire antennas
Longwire antennas are any of several types of resonant and nonresonant antennas.
Any given longwire antenna may be both resonant and nonresonant, depending upon
the operating frequencies used. In the “old days,” when I was first starting in amateur
radio, most resonant longwires were resonant over all HF bands because those bands
were harmonically related to each other. But with the addition of the 10-, 18-, and
24-MHz band segments, that relationship no longer holds true for all cases.
Figure 9-1 shows the classic random length, nonresonant longwire antenna. It
consists of a wire radiator that is at least a quarter-wavelength long, but is most often longer than a quarter-wavelength. The specific length is not critical, but it must
be greater than a quarter-wavelength at the lowest frequency of operation anticipated. If you have a 90-ft wire, it will work on all HF bands above 3.5 MHz. In
Copyright 2001 - the McGraw-Hill Companies

213

Chap09_Carr

4/10/01

2:42 PM

Page 214

214 Longwire directional antennas
Random length

(
)
4

Antenna
tuner
VSWR
meter

Transmitter

9-1 Random-length antenna.

most installations, the wire is no.12 and no.14 copperweld, or hard-drawn copper
wire. I have successfully used both no.12 and no.14 house wire, but because it is
solid (not stranded) it is not the best material. Stranded wire lasts longer in the
wind, because solid wire fatigues and breaks quicker.
The longwire antenna is capable of providing gain over a dipole and a low angle
of radiation (which is great for DX operators!). But these advantages are only found
when the antenna is several wavelengths long, so it occurs only on typical HF antennas in the 21- through 29-MHz bands.
The longwire is end-fed, and therefore has a high impedance, except in those
cases where the radiator happens to be quarter-wavelength. Because of this fact, it
is necessary to use an antenna tuner between the low-impedance transmitter output (usually limited to 50- to 75-Ω impedances) and the antenna. You can buy any
of several commercial antenna tuners, or make one yourself. Figure 9-2 shows a
typical antenna tuner for longwires. It is an L-section coupler consisting of a series
inductance and a shunt capacitance, both variable. The inductor can be homemade, or it can be made from a B&W miniductor (3029 is suitable). Alternatively,
you can buy a used roller inductor from a hamfest. If you opt for the homemade or
miniductor alternatives, then an alligator clip lead (short!) connected to one end
of the coil can be used to short out unneeded turns when adjusting the inductance.
I prefer the roller inductor method, because it allows the whole “shootin’ match” to
be installed inside a shielded cabinet, helping the TVI/BCI (television interference/broadcast interference) situation.

Chap09_Carr

4/10/01

2:42 PM

Page 215

Longwire antennas 215

Antenna
Coax
to
XMTR

L1

C1

Ground

9-2 L-section coupler.

The capacitor (also available from the same sources) should be 150-pF to 250pF maximum capacitance high-voltage variable. So-called transmitting variables are
usually ok if the plate spacing is at least 1⁄8 in.
Tuning of the longwire is simplicity itself. If the tuner does not have a built-in
VSWR meter, then install one in the line between the transmitter output and the
tuner input. Adjust both L1 and C1 (they are a bit interactive so do it several times)
for the lowest VSWR. If you use the alligator clip method, turn off the darn transmitter before adjusting the clip position—RF burns are nasty!

So what’s the problem?
Ok, so we have decided to install a longwire. How do we make it work? First, make
sure that it is long enough. The bare minimum lengths for HF bands are 70 ft for
3.5 MHz and up, 34 ft for 7 MHz and up, and so on. In general, the longer the better.
The second problem is a good ground. The importance of a good ground cannot be
underestimated, and it accounts for about 99 percent of the difference in reported
performance of longwires.
A good ground consists of a short wire to either one very long ground rod or multiple ground rods spaced a couple feet apart. An important factor is the length of
the ground wire. It must be considerably less than a quarter-wavelength. Use no.10
stranded wire (several parallel lengths) or braid.
When I was in college I lived on the second floor of a whacky student boarding
house in Norfolk, VA. The ground was 24 ft away, and that made “short ground wire”
a joke—and my longwire nearly inoperative. But I figured out a way around the
problem. A quarter-wave radial was dropped out the window (see Fig. 9-3). Use
more than one radial if possible. In one case, when the landlord was particularly
cranky, I tacked the radial to the baseboard of my room (insulated on standoffs at the
far end to protect against the high RF voltages present). It worked well!

Chap09_Carr

4/10/01

2:42 PM

Page 216

216 Longwire directional antennas
A new product also comes to the rescue of those reader-hams who cannot put up
a good longwire. The MFJ Enterprises (Box 494, Mississippi State, MS, 39762, 1-800647-1800) model MFJ-931 artificial RF ground is installed in the ground line (see Fig.
9-4) and is used to tune the ground wire. Adjust the capacitance and inductance controls for maximum ground current as shown on the built-in meter. Be sure to follow
the instructions, however, because high RF voltages can appear on a nonresonant
ground wire. I wish I’d had one of these when I was in that whacky boarding house;
discussing existentialist poetry can’t hold a candle to DXing.

Random length

(
)
4

Coax
to
XMTR


Radials
4

Antenna
tunner

9-3 Radials improve the “ground” of random-length antenna.
Tuner
en
Ant

na w

ire

Coax

MFJ-931

Ground
system

9-4 MFJ ground line tuner
installation.

Chap09_Carr

4/10/01

2:42 PM

Page 217

True longwire antennas 217

When is a long wire a longwire?
For many years, the longwire has been a popular form of antenna. It is cheap, it is
easy to construct, and—although reports vary—it has the potential to perform well.
Properly constructed, it has a lot of utility. But what is a real longwire antenna? In
past columns, I have used the term to mean an antenna such as Fig. 9-1. This form of
antenna is popularly called a longwire if it is more than a quarter-wavelength. I and
other authors have used the term longwire to mean this antenna, but that’s not rigorously correct. A true longwire is an antenna that is many wavelengths long, or to
be a little more rigorous, an antenna that is more than two wavelengths long. Although I will still use the term longwire for both forms of longwire antenna, proper
rigor requires Fig. 9-1 to be called a “random-length antenna.”

True longwire antennas
Figure 9-5 shows the true resonant longwire antenna. It is a horizontal antenna, and
if properly installed, it is not simply attached to a convenient support (as is true with
the random length antenna). Rather, the longwire is installed horizontally like a dipole. The ends are supported (dipole-like) from standard end insulators and rope.
The feedpoint of the longwire is one end, so we expect to see a voltage antinode
where the feeder is attached. For this reason we do not use coaxial cable, but rather
either parallel transmission line (also sometimes called open-air line or some such

2

I
R

I

Open-wire
line or
450  twin lead

Coax
jack
To
feeders

L
C

I  insulator
R  rope

Antenna
tuner
VSWR
meter

Transmitter

9-5 End-fed longwire with suitable tuner.

R

Chap09_Carr

4/10/01

2:42 PM

Page 218

218 Longwire directional antennas
name), or 450-Ω twin lead. The transmission line is excited from any of several types
of balanced antenna tuning unit (see Fig. 9-5). Alternatively, a standard antenna
tuning unit (designed for coaxial cable) can be used if a 4:1 balun transformer is
used between the output of the tuner and the input of the feedline.
What does “many wavelengths” mean? That depends upon just what you want
the antenna to do. Figure 9-6 shows a fact about the longwire that excites many
users of longwires: It has gain! Although a two-wavelength antenna only has a slight
gain over a dipole; the longer the antenna, the greater the gain. In fact, it is possible
to obtain gain figures greater than a three-element beam using a longwire, but only
at nine or ten wavelengths.

16

Antenna length (wavelengths)

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Gain relative to dipole (dB)
9-6 Antenna length versus gain over dipole.

8

9

10

Chap09_Carr

4/10/01

2:42 PM

Page 219

True longwire antennas 219
What does this mean? One wavelength is 984/FMHz ft, so at 10 m (29 MHz) one
wavelength is about 34 ft; at 75 m (3.8 MHz) one wavelength is 259 ft long. In order
to meet the two-wavelength criterion a 10-m antenna need only be 68 ft long, while
a 75-m antenna would be 518 ft long! For a ten-wavelength antenna, therefore, we
would need 340 ft for 10 m; and for 75 m, we would need nearly 2,600 ft. Ah me,
now you see why the longwire is not more popular. The physical length of a nonterminated resonant longwire is on the order of
492(N – 0.025)
Lfeet = 
FMHz

[9.1]

(N is number of half-wavelengths in the radiator elements.)
Of course, there are always people like my buddy (now deceased) John
Thorne, K4NFU. He lived near Austin, TX on a multiacre farmette that has a 1400ft property line along one side. John installed a 1300 ft longwire and found it
worked excitingly well. He fed the thing with homebrew 450-Ω parallel (open-air)
line and a Matchbox antenna tuner. John’s longwire had an extremely low angle of
radiation, so he regularly (much to my chagrin on my small suburban lot) worked
ZL, VK, and other Southeast Asia and Pacific basin DX, with only 100 W from a
Kenwood transceiver.
Oddly enough, John also found a little bitty problem with the longwire that textbooks and articles rarely mention: electrostatic fields build up a high-voltage dc
charge on longwire antennas! Thunderstorms as far as 20 mi away produce serious
levels of electrostatic fields, and those fields can cause a buildup of electrical charge
on the antenna conductor. The electric charge can cause damage to the receiver.
John solved the problem by using a resistor at one end to ground. The “resistor” is
composed of ten to twenty 10-MΩ resistors at 2 W each. This resistor bleeds off the
charge, preventing damage to the receiver.
A common misconception about longwire antennas concerns the normal radiation pattern of these antennas. I have heard amateurs, on the air, claim that the maximum radiation for the longwire is
1. Broadside (i.e., 90°) with respect to the wire run or
2. In line with the wire run
Neither is correct, although ordinary intuition would seem to indicate one or the
other. Figure 9-7 shows the approximate radiation pattern of a longwire when
viewed from above. There are four main lobes of radiation from the longwire (A, B,
C, and D). There are also two or more (in some cases many) minor lobes (E and F)
in the antenna pattern. The radiation angle with respect to the wire run (G–H) is a
function of the number of wavelengths found along the wire. Also, the number and
extent of the minor lobes is also a function of the length of the wire.

Chap09_Carr

4/10/01

2:42 PM

Page 220

220 Longwire directional antennas
B

E

Antenna

a
G

C

A

H

9-7 Radiation pattern of longwire
antenna.

F
D

Nonresonant single-wire longwire antennas
The resonant longwire antenna is a standing wave antenna, because it is unterminated at the far end. A signal propagating from the feedpoint, toward the open end,
will be reflected back toward the source when it hits the open end. The interference
between the forward and reflected waves sets up stationary standing current and
voltage waves along the wire.
A nonresonant longwire is terminated at the far end in a resistance equal to its
characteristic impedance. Thus, the incident waves are absorbed by the resistor,
rather than being reflected. Such an antenna is called a traveling wave antenna.
Figure 9-8 shows a terminated longwire antenna. The transmitter end is like the feed
system for other longwire antennas, but the far end is grounded through a terminating resistor R1 that has a resistance R equal to the characteristic impedance Zo of
the antenna (i.e., R = Zo). When the wire is 20 to 30 ft above the ground, Zo is about
500 to 600 Ω.
The radiation pattern for the terminated longwire is a unidirectional version of
the multilobed pattern found on the unterminated longwires. The angles of the
lobes vary with frequency, even though the pattern remains unidirectional. The directivity of the antenna is partially specified by the angles of the main lobes. It is interesting to note that gain rises almost linearly with nλ, while the directivity
function changes rapidly at shorter lengths (above three or four wavelengths the
rate of change diminishes considerably). Thus, when an antenna is cut for a certain
low frequency, it will work at higher frequencies, but the directivity characteristic
will be different at each end of the spectrum of interest.
A two-wavelength (2λ) pattern is shown in Fig. 9-7. There are four major lobes
positioned at angles of ±36° from the longwire. There are also four minor lobes—
the strongest of which is –5 dB down from the major lobes—at angles of ±75° from
the longwire. Between all of the lobes, there are sharp nulls in which little reception
is possible. As the wire length is made longer, the angle of the main lobes pulls in
tighter (i.e., toward the wire). As the lobes pull in closer to the wire, the number of
minor lobes increases. At 5λ, there are still four main lobes, but they are at angles
of ±22° from the wire. Also, the number of minor lobes increases to 16. The minor lobes
are located at ±47°, ±62°, ±72°, and ±83° with respect to the wire. The minor
lobes tend to be –5 to –10 dB below the major lobes. When the longwire gets very

Chap09_Carr

4/10/01

2:42 PM

Page 221

Nonresonant single-wire longwire antennas 221

2
R

I

I

R  rope
I  insulator

ATU

XMTR

R

R1
400–800 

radials
4

9-8 Longwire (greater than 2λ) antenna is terminated in a resistance (typically 400 to 800 Ω).
Radials under the resistor improve the grounding of the antenna.

much longer than 5λ, the four main lobes begin to converge along the length of the
wire, and the antenna becomes bidirectional. This effect occurs at physical lengths
greater than about 20λ.
In general, the following rules apply to longwire antennas:
• On each side of the antenna, there is at least one lobe, minor or major, for each
half-wavelength of the wire element. For the overall element, there is one lobe
for every quarter-wavelength.
• If there are an even number of lobes on either side of the antenna wire, then
half of the total number of lobes are tilted backward, and half are tilted forward; symmetry is maintained.
• If there are an odd number of lobes on either side of the wire, then one lobe
on either side will be perpendicular to the wire, with the other lobes distributed either side of the perpendicular lobe.

Vee beams and rhombic beams
Longwire antennas can be combined in several ways to increase gain and sharpen
directivity. Two of the most popular of these are the vee beam and the rhombic antennas. Both forms can be made in either resonant (unterminated) or nonresonant
(terminated) versions.
Vee beams The vee beam (Fig. 9-9A) consists of two equal-length longwire
elements (wire 1 and wire 2), fed 180° out of phase with each other, and spaced
to produce an acute angle between them. The 180° phase difference is inherent in
connecting the two wires of the vee to opposite conductors of the same parallel conductor feedline.

Chap09_Carr

4/10/01

2:42 PM

Page 222

222 Longwire directional antennas

W

ire

1



2

}

Resultant
pattern
Direction
of
maximum
reception

W

ire

2

9-9A Radiation pattern of vee beam antenna consists of the algebraic sum of the two longwire
patterns that make up the antenna.

The unterminated vee beam (Fig. 9-9A) has a bidirectional pattern that is created
by summing together the patterns of the two individual wires. Proper alignment of the
main lobes of the two wires requires an included angle, between the wires, of twice
the radiation angle of each wire. If the radiation angle of the wire is β, then the appropriate included angle is 2β. To raise the pattern a few degrees, the 2β angle should be
slightly less than these values. It is common practice to design a vee beam for a low
frequency (e.g., 75-/80- or 40-m bands), and then to use it also on higher frequencies
that are harmonics of the minimum design frequency. A typical vee beam works well
over a very wide frequency range only if the included angle is adjusted to a reasonable
compromise. It is common practice to use an included angle that is between 35° and
90°, depending on how many harmonic bands are required.
Vee beam patterns are based on an antenna height that is greater than a halfwavelength from the ground. At low frequencies, such heights will not be practical, and
you must expect a certain distortion of the pattern because of ground reflection effects.
Gain on a vee beam antenna is about 3 dB higher than the gain of the single-wire
longwire antenna of the same size, and it is considerably higher than the gain of a

Chap09_Carr

4/10/01

2:42 PM

Page 223

Nonresonant single-wire longwire antennas 223
dipole (see Fig. 9-9B). At three wavelengths, for example, the gain is 7 dB over a dipole. In addition, there may be some extra gain because of mutual impedance
effects—which can be about 1 dB at 5λ and 2 dB at 8λ.
Nonresonant vee beams Like the single-wire longwire antennas, the vee beam
can be made nonresonant by terminating each wire in a resistance that is equal to
the antenna’s characteristic impedance (Fig. 9-10). Although the regular vee is a
standing wave antenna, the terminated version is a traveling wave antenna and is
thus unidirectional. Traveling wave antennas achieve unidirectionality because the
terminating resistor absorbs the incident wave after it has propagated to the end of
the wire. In a standing-wave antenna, that energy is reflected backwards toward the
source, so it can radiate oppositely from the incident wave.
Rhombic beams The rhombic beam antenna, also called the double vee,
consists of two vee beams positioned end-to-end with the tips connected. The unidirectional, nonresonant (terminated) rhombic is shown in Fig. 9-11. The unterminated resonant form gives approximately the same gain and directivity as a vee
beam of the same size. The nonresonant rhombic has a gain of about 3 dB over a
vee beam of the same size (see Fig. 9-9 again).
Two angles are present on the rhombic antenna. One-half of the included angle of the two legs of one wire is the tilt angle (φ), while the angle between the
two wires is the apex angle (θ). A common rhombic design uses a tilt angle of
70°, a length of 6λ for each leg (two legs per side), and a height above the ground
of 1.1λ.

9-9B Gain versus length of vee beam and rhombic beam antennas.

Chap09_Carr

4/10/01

2:42 PM

Page 224

224 Longwire directional antennas

R

}

Resultant pattern

R

9-10 Nonresonant vee beam antenna.

The termination resistance for the nonresonant rhombic is 600 to 800 Ω, and
must be noninductive. For transmitting rhombics, the resistor should be capable of
dissipating at least one-third of the average power of the transmitter. For receiveonly rhombics, the termination resistor can be a 2-W carbon composition or metalfilm type. Such an antenna works nicely over an octave (2:1) frequency range.

Beverage or “wave” antennas
The Beverage or wave antenna is considered by many people to be the best receive
antenna available for very low frequency (VLF), AM broadcast band (BCB), medium

Chap09_Carr

4/10/01

2:42 PM

Page 225

Nonresonant single-wire longwire antennas 225











R



ATU

XMTR

9-11 Terminated rhombic antenna.

wave (MW), or tropical band (low HF region) DXing. The Beverage was used by RCA
at its Riverhead, Long Island (NY) station in 1922, and a technical description by Dr.
H. H. Beverage (for whom it is named) appeared in QST magazine for November
1922, in an article titled “The Wave Antenna for 200-Meter Reception.” In 1984, an
edited and updated version of the 1922 article appeared in the same magazine. In
1921, Paul Godley, under sponsorship of the American Radio Relay League, journeyed
to Scotland to erect a receiving station at Androssan. His mission was to listen for amateur radio signals from North America. As a result of politicking in the post–World
War I era, hams were consigned to the supposedly useless shortwave (λ < 200 m), and
it was not clear that reliable international communications were possible. Godley went
to Scotland to see if that could happen; he reportedly used a wave antenna for the task
(today, called the Beverage).
The Beverage antenna is a longwire of special design, more than one wavelength
(1λ) long (Fig. 9-12), although some authorities maintain that >0.5λ is minimally sufficient. The Beverage provides good directivity and good gain, but is not very efficient.

Chap09_Carr

4/10/01

2:42 PM

Page 226

226 Longwire directional antennas
As a result, it is preferred for receiving, and is less useful for transmitting. This is an
example of how different attributes of various antennas make the Law of Reciprocity
an unreliable sole guide to antenna selection. Unlike the regular longwire, which is of
a different design, the Beverage is intended to be mounted close to the earth’s surface
(typically < 0.1λ); heights of 8 to 10 feet is the usual prescription.
Figure 9-12 shows the basic single-wire Beverage antenna. It consists of a single
conductor (no.16 to no.8 wire, with no.14 being most common) erected about 8 to 10 ft
above ground. Some Beverages are unterminated (and bidirectional), but most of them
are terminated at the far end in a resistance R equal to the antenna’s characteristic impedance Zo. The receiver end is also terminated in its characteristic impedance, but
generally requires an impedance matching transformer to reduce the antenna impedance to the 50-Ω standard impedance used by most modern transmitters.
The Beverage works best in the low-frequency bands (VLF through MW),
although at least some results are reportedly relatively easy to obtain up to 25 m
(11.5 MHz). Some questionably successful attempts have been made at making
Beverage antennas work as high as the 11-m Citizens Band or the 10-m ham band
(29.7 MHz).
The Beverage antenna works on vertically polarized waves arriving at low angles of
incidence. These conditions are normal in the AM BCB, where nearly all transmitting
antennas are vertically polarized. In addition, the ground- and sky-wave propagations
found in these bands (VLF, BCB, and low HF) are relatively consistent. As the frequency increases, however, two factors become increasingly dominant. First, the likelihood of horizontal polarization increases because of the size of a wavelength at those
frequencies. The polarization of the received signal not only changes in those bands, but
does so constantly when conditions are unsettled. It is the strong dependence of the
Longwire (0.5)
Direction of
maximum
signal

To
receiver

T1

Primary
winding

8 to 10 ft

R

Radials

Secondary
winding

Ground-toground
wire
9-12 Beverage antenna.

Chap09_Carr

4/10/01

2:42 PM

Page 227

Nonresonant single-wire longwire antennas 227
Beverage on relatively constant vertical polarization that makes me suspect the claims
of Beverage-like performance above the 25- or even 31-m bands.
The Beverage depends on being erected over poorly conductive soil, even
though the terminating resistor needs a good ground. Thus, one source claimed that
sand beaches adjacent to salty marshes make the best Beverage sites (a bit of an
overstatement). Figure 9-13 shows why poorly conductive soil is needed. The E-field
vectors are launched from the transmitting antenna perpendicular to the earth’s surface. Over perfectly conducting soil, the vertical waves would remain vertical. But
over imperfectly conducting soil, the field lines tend to bend close to the point of
contact with the ground. As shown in the inset of Fig. 9-13, the bending of the wave
provides a horizontal component of the E-field vector, and this provides the means
of generating an RF current in the conductor wire.
A debate among Beverage antenna fans regards the best length for the antenna.
Some sources state that the length can be anything greater than or equal to 0.5λ, yet
others say greater than or equal to1λ is the minimum size. One camp says that the
length should be as long as possible, while others say it should be close to a factor
called the maximum effective length (MEL), which is

MEL =
4



λ
100 – 1

K



[9.2]

where
MEL is the maximum effective length, in meters
λ is the wavelength, in meters
K is the velocity factor, expressed as a percent
Misek, who may well be the leading exponent of the Beverage antenna, uses
numbers like 1.6λ to 1.7λ over the 1.8- to 7.3-MHz region, and 0.53λ to 0.56λ on frequencies lower than 1.8 MHz. Doctor Beverage was once quoted as saying that the
optimum length is 1λ.
Like the longwire antenna, the Beverage needs a termination resistor that is
connected to a good ground. This requirement might be harder to meet on Beverage
antennas because they work best over lossy ground, which doesn’t make a very good
ground connection. As in the longwire case, insulated or bare wires, a quarter-wavelength long, make the best radials. However, a substantial improvement in the
ground is possible using just bare wires measuring 15 to 20 ft long (which is much
less than λ/4), buried in the soil just below the surface (far enough to prevent erosion from bringing it to the surface). Many articles and books on Beverages show
ground rods of 2 or 3 ft long, which borders on the ridiculous. Poor soil requires
longer ground rods, on the order of 6 to 8 ft. Copper-clad steel makes the best rods.
In addition to the radials and ground rod, Misek also recommends using a wire
connection between the ground connection at the termination resistor, and the

Chap09_Carr

4/10/01

2:42 PM

Page 228

228 Longwire directional antennas
Direction of
propagation

E-field
Wire
90°

Rx

Good conductivity
ground

Medium
conductivity
ground

{

{

{

Rr

Poor
ground

E-field

Wire

Vx
Vx
9-13 Performance of Beverage antenna over different values of ground conductance.

ground connection at the receiver transformer (see again Fig. 9-12). According to
Misek, this wire helps to stabilize the impedance variations at higher frequencies.
Installation of the Beverage antenna is not overly critical if certain rules are followed. The antenna should be installed at a height of 6 to 10 ft off the ground, and it
should be level with the ground over its entire length. If the ground is not flat enough
to make a level installation possible, then try to use a height that is 6 to 10 ft above the
average terrain elevation along its run. A popular installation method is to erect 16-ft
4 × 4 lumber, such that 3 to 4 ft are buried in a concrete-filled posthole. Use lumber
that is treated for outdoor use (i.e., pressure-treated lumber sold for decks and
porches. The wire can be fastened to the 4 × 4 posts using either ceramic standoff
(“beehive”) insulators or electric fence insulators (which some people deem preferable). Try to use one contiguous length of wire for the antenna, if possible, in order to
avoid soldered splices and joints.
One of the Beverage installation difficulties shared with the longwire is the need
to slope down to a point where a termination resistor can be easily installed close to
the ground. While the longwire can be sloped over a large portion of its length, the
Beverage should be sloped downward only over the last 60 ft or so.

Chap09_Carr

4/10/01

2:42 PM

Page 229

Nonresonant single-wire longwire antennas 229

Steerable notch Beverage antennas
A Beverage erected with two wires—parallel to each other, at the same height,
spaced about 12 in apart (Fig. 9-14), with a length that is a multiple of a half-wavelength—is capable of null steering. That is, the rear null in the pattern can be
steered over a range of 40° to 60°. This feature allows strong, off-axis signals to be
reduced in amplitude so that weaker signals in the main lobe of the pattern can
be received. There are at least two varieties of the steerable wave Beverage (SWB).
If null steering behavior is desired, then a phase control circuit (PCC) will be
required—consisting of a potentiometer, an inductance, and a variable capacitor in
series with each other. Varying both the “pot” and the capacitor will steer the null.
You can select the direction of reception, and the direction of the null, by using a
switch to swap the receiver and the PCC between port A and port B.

Port A

T1

Port B

12 ft

Receiver
T2

L1
300 H
R1
1000 

C1
450 pF

9-14 Beverage antenna with a steerable null.

T3

This page intentionally left blank

10

CHAPTER

Hidden and
limited-space antennas
ONE OF THE MOST SIGNIFICANT IMPEDIMENTS TO AMATEUR RADIO OPERATORS, CB

operators, and shortwave listeners is the space available for their antennas. In
many thousands of other cases, the limitation is less one of space, but of regulators. More and more subdivisions are built with covenants on the deed that prohibit the buyer from installing outdoor antennas. Once limited to townhouse
developments, where that breed of contemptible vermin (called the Homeowners
Committee) routinely intruded on the affairs of people who mistakenly think they
“own” their townhouse (ownership implies right of use, which is limited by the
covenants). These onerous covenants are now routinely placed on single-family
dwellings as well. In fact, it is the single most serious threat to amateur communications people in the country today. Other homeowners are no longer angered
by the restriction on antennas because their television reception is now carried to
them via cable systems in most parts of the country. Even where cable is not available, most users can install a moderately sized television antenna in their attic, or
use rabbit ears. In other cases, the townhouse community will install a single master TV antenna and then distribute signals to each unit. The result is that the amateur radio operator, CB operator, and shortwave listener are left to fend for
themselves without assistance from neighbors.
In this chapter we will examine some of the alternatives available to those readers who have either a limited space situation (such as a small city lot), or are unable
to move out of a subdivision where there are stupid rules against outdoor antennas.
The suggestions contained in this chapter are not universal, and indeed the author
recommends that you adapt, as well as adopt, these recommendations, and come up
with some of your own. Creativity within the constraints of the laws of physics governing radio antennas is encouraged.

Copyright 2001 - the McGraw-Hill Companies

231

Chap10_Carr

4/10/01

2:41 PM

Page 232

232 Hidden and limited-space antennas

Hidden antennas
A hidden antenna is one that is either completely shielded from view or disguised as
something else. Alternatively, you could also include in this category antennas that
are in semiopen view, but which are not too obvious (except to the trained and diligent eye). Some people have opted for “hidden” longwires made of very fine wire
(no. 26 enameled wire is popular). The user will install the wire in the open, high off
of the ground (as in an apartment installation), and operate without anyone knowing the difference. One chap used no. 22 wire suspended between two 16-story
apartment house buildings that were 100 yards apart. He had one of the best working longwires in town until a windy day when the whole thing came down. No one
was injured; but had someone been hurt, there might have been a lawsuit. Hidden
antennas must be designed with an eye toward causing others no harm. It is neither
ethical nor smart to place others at risk in enjoying our hobbies.
The dipole is a popular antenna with both shortwave listeners and amateur radio operators. Indeed, for the CB operator who wants to get on the air from an apartment or townhouse (or restricted single-family home), the dipole can represent a
respectable alternative.
As you learned in Chap. 6, the dipole is a horizontal wire (or pipe) antenna that
is a half-wavelength long and fed in the center (ideally) with 75-Ω coaxial cable. In
the “townhouse” dipole, it is possible to build the antenna entirely inside the attic of
the building. The length of the dipole is given approximately by
468
Lft  
FMHz

[10.1]

If you do some quick calculations you will find that antennas for the 10-, 13-, 15-,
and (possibly) even 18- and 20-m bands, will fit entirely inside the typical townhouse
attic. This statement is also true of the 11-m citizen’s band antenna: It will fit inside
the standard townhouse attic. But what about the lower frequency bands?
Figure 10-1 shows a possible solution to the use of the lower frequencies in the
townhouse situation. The two quarter-wavelength arms of the dipole are ideally installed in line with each other, as was shown in the chapter on horizontal antennas.
But in a sticky situation we can also install the dipole with the arms bent to accommodate the space available. In this example, only one of many possible methods for
accomplishing this job is shown. Here each quarter-wavelength section is composed
of two legs, AB and CD, respectively. Ideally, segments B and C are the longest dimensions. Also, if possible, make segments A and D equal lengths. Another method
is to reverse the direction of one end leg, say for example D, and run it to the other
corner of the building over the peak of the roof.
The author is almost hesitant to offer only one drawing, despite space constraints, in the fear that readers will take the offered pattern as the only authorized
version, or solution. In reality, you might not be able (for a variety of reasons) to use
the exact pattern shown (so ad lib a little bit).
How about performance? Will the constrained dipole of Fig. 10-1 work as well as
a regular dipole installed a wavelength or two off the ground and away from objects?

Chap10_Carr

4/10/01

2:41 PM

Page 233

Hidden antennas 233
One possible
solution
A
House

B

C

D

10-1 Installing dipole in attic.

In a word: no. But that is not the problem being solved; getting on the air at all is the
present problem. You will find that the pattern of the constrained dipole is distorted
compared with that of the regular dipole. In addition, the feedpoint impedance is not
going to be 73 Ω (except if by fluke), so you will be required to use an antenna tuner
of some kind. You are well advised to read the chapter on antenna instruments and
measurements so that you can be prepared to figure out any feed problems that crop
up—as well they might.
The wire used in the constrained dipole (or other forms of attic antenna) should
be mounted on TV-type screw-in standoff insulators. Almost any outlet that sells TV
antennas, or installation parts, will have them. These standoff insulators are also
available in many hardware stores, and department stores that sell TV antennas or
“Harry and Harriet Homeowner” supplies, in addition to electronics parts suppliers.
Do not simply tape the wire to the wooden underside of your roof. The reason is simple: in a poorly tuned antenna, voltages can get high enough at the ends to produce
corona effects; arcing could be a fire hazard. Also, use insulated wire to avoid accidental contact in the event that someone is in the attic when you are operating. Be
aware that the insulation might affect the propagation velocity of signals in the wire,
so it will slightly alter the required length.

Chap10_Carr

4/10/01

2:41 PM

Page 234

234 Hidden and limited-space antennas
Another alternative for the attic antenna, and one that avoids some of the problems of corona effects, is the nonresonant loop shown in Fig. 10-2. Although specified as a top view, the loop can be installed in the configuration that best uses the
space. In fact, the best performance will be bidirectional when the loop is installed
vertically. In this case, a large loop (as large as can be accommodated in the space
available) is installed in the attic. Again, use standoff insulators and insulated wire
for the installation.
The giant loop is fed with parallel line, and is tuned with a balanced antenna tuning unit. As was true with the constrained dipole, the performance is not to be
equated with the performance of more regular antennas; but, with the prospect of
not being on the air at all . . . ! Once again we have a compromise antenna for a compromising situation.
Another ploy is the old “flagpole trick” shown in Fig. 10-3. Some developments allow homeowners to vent their patriotism by installing flagpoles—and flagpoles can be
disguised antennas. In the most obvious case, you can install a brass or aluminum flagpole and feed it directly from an antenna tuning unit. For single-band operation, especially on the higher frequencies, you can delta-feed the “flagpole” unobtrusively, and
call your flagpole a vertical antenna. But that is not always the best solution.
Figure 10-3 shows two methods for creating a flagpole antenna, and both depend on using white PVC plumbing pipe as the pole. The heavier grades of PVC pipe

Large wire
loop
(Top view)

10-2 Large loop antenna.

Parallel line

Tuner

Coax to
XMTR

Chap10_Carr

4/10/01

2:41 PM

Page 235

Hidden antennas 235
are self-supporting to heights of 16 to 20 ft, although lighter grades are not selfsupporting at all (hence are not usable).
Figure 10-3A shows the use of a PVC flagpole in which a no. 12 (or no. 14) wire is
hidden inside. This wire is the antenna radiator. For some frequencies, the wire will be
resonant, and for others, it will surely be nonresonant. Because of this problem an antenna tuning unit is used either at the base of the antenna or inside at the transmitter.

Flag

Taut
#14 or #12 wire
hidden inside

10-3A Flagpole antenna made
from thick-walled
PVC pipe.

PVC
plumbing
pipe

Tuner

Coax
to
XMTR

Chap10_Carr

4/10/01

2:41 PM

Page 236

236 Hidden and limited-space antennas
If the wire is too long for resonance (as might happen in the higher bands), then place
a capacitor in series with the wire. Various settings may be required, so use a multisection transmitting variable that has a total capacitance selectable to more than 1000
pF. Alternatively, use a vacuum variable capacitor of the same range.
In cases where the antenna is too short for resonance, as will occur in the lower
bands, insert an inductance in series with the line to “lengthen” it. Another alternative is to use an L-section tuner at the feedpoint.
A good compromise situation is the use of a 16-ft length of “flagpole” pipe with a
16-foot wire embedded inside. The 16-foot wire is resonant at 20 m, so it will perform
like a vertical antenna at those frequencies. The tuner will then accommodate frequencies above and below 20 m.
Another alternative is the version shown in Fig. 10-3B. In this case the wire radiator is replaced with a section of aluminum tubing. A wooden or plastic insert is
fashioned with a drill and file to support the aluminum tubing inside the PVC tubing.
One way to make the support is to use a core bit in an electric drill to cut out a disk
that fits snugly inside the PVC tubing. Rat out the center hole, left by the core bit pilot, to the outside diameter of the aluminum tubing. The support can be held in place
with screws from the outside, or simply glued in place.
The problem of operating with a hidden antenna is a serious challenge. But with
some of these guidelines and a little creativity, you can get on the air and enjoy your
amateur radio hobby.

Limited-space antennas
Many people live in situations where it is permissible to install an outdoor antenna,
but it is not practical to install a full-size antenna. I once lived in a house that was 16
ft wide and 37 ft long, on a 33 × 100-ft lot. Very few full-sized antennas could be installed on that lot because of the space constraints. Beam antennas were out because
county laws required that the antenna not hang over the property line. Although vertical antennas were possible, there was a period of time when I used other antennas
that were easier to install. In this chapter, you will examine some of the options open
to those with limited space for amateur radio, CB, or SWL antennas.
Once again we return the simple dipole as the basis for our discussion. In Fig.
10-4, you see several alternatives for installing an outdoor antenna in a limited space. In
Fig. 10-4A, the slanted dipole (or slipole) antenna uses the standard dipole configuration, but one end is connected to the high point of the building, while the other is anchored near the ground. The coaxial cable is connected to the midpoint of the antenna
in the usual manner for regular dipoles. If the end of the dipole is within reach of people on the ground, then they may get a nasty RF burn if the antenna is touched while
you are operating. Take precautions to keep people and pets away from this lower end.
Another method is the vee dipole shown in Fig. 10-4B. In a regular dipole installation, the ends of the antenna are along the same axis (in other words, at an
angle of 180°). In the example of Fig. 10-4B, however, the angle between the elements is less than 180°, but greater than 90°. In some cases we might want to bend
the elements, rather than install them in a vee shape. Figure 10-4C shows an angled dipole with four segments. For the best performance (but not as good as that

Chap10_Carr

4/10/01

2:41 PM

Page 237

Limited-space antennas 237

End
cap

Wooden or
plastic plug

PVC plumbing pipe
(sectioned view)

1/2 inch to 11/4 inch
aluminum tubing

10-3B PVC flagpole hiding an
aluminum tubing vertical.

Feedpoint

of a regular dipole), make A = D and B = C. In all three examples, Figs. 10-4A
through 10-4C, you can expect to find the length needed for resonance varies
somewhat from the standard 468/FMHz value, and that the feedpoint impedance is
other than 73 Ω. Also, the pattern will be distorted with respect to the regular dipole. Although these antennas do not work as well as a properly installed dipole,
the performance is sufficient to allow successful operation.

Chap10_Carr

4/10/01

2:41 PM

Page 238

238 Hidden and limited-space antennas
House, tree or
other structure
Insulator
Rope


/4

ra

di

at

or

Center insulator

Coax



/4

ra

di

at

or

Insulator

Rope
Ground
10-4A Sloper dipole.

Another limited-space wire antenna is the (so-called) half-slope shown in Fig.
10-4D. Although single-band versions are often seen, the example in Fig. 10-4D is a
multiband version. Resonant traps separate the different band segments. This antenna operates like the vertical, but it is not omnidirectional. Also, the feedpoint impedance will be different from the regular vertical situation. If the impedance varies
too much for comfort, insert an antenna tuner, such as the Transmatch, in the coaxial line between the transmitter and the antenna.
Figure 10-5 shows another antenna that’s useful for limited-space situations. Although it is easily constructed from low-cost materials, the antenna is also sold by
several companies under various rubrics including “cliff-dweller,” “apartment
house,” “townhouse,” or “traveler’s” antennas. The antenna consists of a 4- to 16-ft
section of aluminum or copper tubing. Some of the commercial antennas use a telescoping tubing that can be carried easily in luggage. As was true with the longwire,
the window-sill antenna is tuned to resonance with an L-section coupler.
The L-section coupler must be tuned to produce the lowest possible VSWR, so
either an RF power meter or a VSWR meter must be installed in the coaxial cable between the transmitter and the tuner. Again, a good ground (or radial system) will

Chap10_Carr

4/10/01

2:41 PM

Page 239

Limited-space antennas 239

Vee dipole

10-4B Vee dipole.

greatly improve the operation of this antenna. The performance should be considerably less than that of a good longwire, but it will work DX for you even on lower frequencies. Once again it is not the best antenna made, but it will get you on the air.
Figure 10-6 shows the use of a mobile antenna for a fixed or portable location. I
used this type of antenna at one QTH to good effect. Mount a mobile antenna, such
as the Hustler, on the window sill, or other convenient mount (at least one amateur
radio operator uses one mounted on the roof of the house). Grounding is essential
for this antenna, as was also true for the longwire and window-sill antenna (Fig.
10-5). The operation of this antenna is improved by installing at least two radials per
band as a counterpoise ground. My installation worked well, even though only two
radials were present.
A directional rotatable dipole is shown in Fig. 10-7. This antenna is made from a
pair of mobile antennas connected “back-to-back” on a horizontal length of 1 × 2
lumber and fed in the center with a coaxial cable. The end pieces of the mobile antenna set the resonance, and you must recognize that adjusting one requires a countervailing adjustment of the other as well.
Two examples of helically wound antennas are shown in Fig. 10-8. In this type
of antenna, an insulating mast is wound with a half-wavelength of antenna wire. The
overall length of the antenna is considerably less than a half-wavelength, except at
the highest frequencies. In order to dissipate the high voltages that tend to build up
at the ends of these antennas, a capacitance hat is used. These “hats” are either disks
(pie tins work well) or rods of conductor about 16 to 24 in long. The version shown
in Fig. 10-8A is a vertical antenna, and like other verticals, it must be installed over
either a good ground or a counterpoise ground. The version shown in Fig. 10-8B is horizontally polarized.

Chap10_Carr

4/10/01

2:41 PM

Page 240

240 Hidden and limited-space antennas

Rope

A
B
Insulator
Center insulator

Rope
Coax
C
D
Insulator
10-4C Bent dipole.

Insulator
Rope

Band traps

Insulator
Rope
Coax
to
XMTR

10-4D Sloper trap vertical.

Chap10_Carr

4/10/01

2:41 PM

Page 241

Limited-space antennas 241

4- to 16-foot pipe

L
Coax
Wooden wedge

C

Window sill

10-5 Window sill antenna.

Mobile
antenna

Metal
plate

Mobile
mount

Optional
radial

Coax

Wooden support
Window sill
10-6 Use of mobile antenna as a window sill antenna.

Chap10_Carr

4/10/01

2:41 PM

Page 242

242 Hidden and limited-space antennas
Two mobile
antennas

Coax

12 Wood
Mounting
pipe

Pipe flange

10-7 Use of two mobile antennas as a rotatable dipole.

Short adjustable
whip for tuning

4 to 20 foot
PVC pipe wrapped
with /2 of #12 or
#14 wire
10-8A Helically vertical antenna.

Coax

Chap10_Carr

4/10/01

2:41 PM

Page 243

Limited-space antennas 243
Capacitance
hats

Dowel or plastic pipe
wrapped with wire

Feedpoint

10-8B Helically wound dipole antenna.

This page intentionally left blank

11

CHAPTER

Directional phased
vertical antennas
THE VERTICAL ANTENNA IS A PERENNIAL FAVORITE WITH RADIO COMMUNICATIONS

users. The vertical is either praised, or cursed, depending upon the luck of the
owner. “DXability” is usually the criterion for judging the antenna’s quality. Some
amateurs can’t get out of their backyards with a vertical, and they let everyone
within earshot know that such and such a brand is no good. Yet, another person routinely works New Zealand or Australia on 15 m using exactly the same brand of vertical. The proper installation of vertical antennas is dealt with in another chapter, so,
for the present, let’s look at another problem attributed to vertical antennas.
That problem is that vertical antennas are omnidirectional in the azimuth aspect;
that is, they send out and receive equally well from all directions. Some people moan
that this pattern dissipates their power, and gives them a weaker signal “out where it
counts” (true). However, the main disadvantage of the omnidirectional pattern is noise
(QRN and QRM). “QRN” is natural noise from thunderstorms and other sources.
“QRM” is man-made noise, and can consist of other stations or the many assorted forms
of electrical filth that pollute the airwaves. All forms of noise, however, have one thing
in common: they are directional with respect to the station. In other words, if you could
null signals coming from the direction of the noise source (or undesired station), you
would be able to hear desired stations much better. A directional antenna performs this
task, so let’s look at some vertically polarized directional antennas.
Although most amateurs seem to think that the effective radiated power (ERP) increase that the directional antenna gives them is the real reason to own one, the main
benefit is actually on receive. Think about it for a moment. With anywhere from 100 to
1500 W available, the increase or decrease in signal strength (due to the directivity of
the antenna) results in a minimal difference on the receive end, especially during good
DX conditions. If we rotate the directional pattern, to null out interference, then we
usually find that the change in our signal strength perceived by the other guy is small;
the S meter reading of the desired station is minimally affected; but the amplitude of
the interference source is greatly attenuated! The overall effect is an apparent increase
Copyright 2001 - the McGraw-Hill Companies

245

Chap11_Carr

4/10/01

3:36 PM

Page 246

246 Directional phased vertical antennas
in the other guy’s signal, even though the S meter tells a slightly different story. The improvement of signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) is tremendously improved.

Directivity and phasing
So, how does a vertical antenna owner get the benefit of directivity without the kilobuck
investment that a beam or quad costs? The usual solution is to use phased verticals. AM
broadcast stations, with more than one tower, are using this type of system (although
for different reasons than hams). The idea is to place two or more antennas in close
proximity and feed them at specific phase angles to produce a desired radiation pattern.
A lot of material is available in the literature on phased vertical antenna systems, and it
is far too much to be reproduced here. There are “standard patterns” dating from before World War II that are created with different spacings and different phase angles of
feed current. In this chapter, we will consider only one system.
Figure 11-1 shows the patterns for a pair of quarter-wavelength vertical antennas
spaced a half-wavelength (180°) apart. Without getting into complex phase shifting
networks, there are basically two phasings that are easily obtained: 0° (antennas in
phase) and 180° (antennas out of phase with each other).
When the two antennas (A and B) are fed in phase with equal currents (Fig. 111A), the radiation pattern (shown somewhat idealized here) is a bidirectional figure 8
that is directionally perpendicular to the line of centers between the two antennas; this
pattern is called a broadside pattern. A sharp null exists along the line of centers (A-B).
When the antennas are fed out of phase with each other by 180° (Fig. 11-1B),
the pattern rotates 90° (a quarter way around the compass) and now exhibits directivity along the line of the centers (A-B); this is the “end fire” pattern. The interference cancelling null is now perpendicular to line A-B.
It should be apparent that you can select your directivity by selecting the phase
angle of the feed currents in the two antennas. Figure 11-2 shows the two feeding

A

B

11-1A Pattern of two radiators
in-phase, spaced a
half-wavelength apart.

Chap11_Carr

4/10/01

3:36 PM

Page 247

Directivity and phasing 247

11-1B Pattern of two radiators out of
phase, spaced a half-wavelength
apart.

B

A

A

B

/2

/4

/4

L1

L2

L1  L2

L3
To transmitter
11-2A Feeding a phased array antenna in phase.

systems usually cited for in-phase (Fig. 11-2A) and out-of-phase (Fig. 11-2B) systems. Figure 11-2A shows the coax from the transmitter coming to a coax tee connector. From the connector to the antenna feedpoints are two lengths of coax (L1
and L2 ) that are equal to each other, and identical. Given the variation between
coaxial cables, I suspect that it would work better if the two cables were not merely
the same length (L1 = L2), but also that they came from the same roll.
The second variation, shown in Fig. 11-2B, supposedly produces a 180° phase
shift between antenna A and antenna B, when length L3 is an electrical half-wavelength. According to a much-publicized theory, the system of Fig. 11-2B ought to

Chap11_Carr

4/10/01

3:36 PM

Page 248

248 Directional phased vertical antennas
B

A

/4

/4

L3

L3'
11-2B Feeding a phased array antenna out of phase.

produce the pattern of Fig. 11-1B—yet experience shows this claim is false. It seems
that there are several problems with the system in Fig. 11-2B.
First, coax has a property called velocity factor (VF), which is the fraction of the
speed of light at which signals in the cable propagate. The VF is a decimal fraction on
the order of 0.66 to 0.90, depending upon the type of coax used. Unfortunately, the
physical spacing between A and B is a real half-wavelength (L3 = 492/F), but the cable length is shorter by the velocity factor [L3' = (VF × 492) /F].
Consider an example. A 15-m phased vertical antenna system will have two
11-ft radiators, spaced 22 ft apart (approximately, depending upon exact frequency). If we use foam coax, with VF = 0.80, the cable length is 0.8 × 22 ft, or
17.6 ft. In other words, despite lots of publicity, the cable won’t fit between the
towers!
Second, the patterns shown in Fig. 11-1 are dependent upon one condition: the
antenna currents are equal. If both of them are the same impedance, and are fed
from the same transmitter, then it is reasonable to assume that the currents are
equal—right? No, wrong! What about coax loss? Because of normal coax loss, which
increases at higher frequencies, the power available to antenna B in Fig. 11-1B is less
than the power available to antenna A. Thus, the pattern will be somewhat distorted,
because the current produced in B is less than the current in A, when they should be
equal.
The first problem is sometimes fixed by using unequal lengths for cables L1 and
L2 (Fig. 11-2A), and using it for the out-of-phase case. For example, if we make L1
one-quarter wavelength and L2 three-quarter wavelength (Fig. 11-2C), antenna A is
fed with a 90° phase lag (relative to the tee connector signal), while antenna B is fed
with a 270° phase shift. The result is still a 180° phase difference. Unfortunately, we

Chap11_Carr

4/10/01

3:36 PM

Page 249

Directivity and phasing 249
A

B
/2
/4

/4
/4

3/4

Coax
to
XMTR
11-2C Corrected feed for a phased array antenna.

have not solved the current level problem, and may have actually made it worse by
adding still more lossy cable to the system.
There is still another problem that is generic to the whole class of phased verticals. Once installed, the pattern is fixed. This problem doesn’t bother most point-topoint commercial stations, or broadcasters, because they tend to transmit in only one
direction. But amateurs are likely to need a rotatable pattern. Neither the antennas in
Fig. 11-1A nor that in Fig. 11-1B is rotatable without a lot of effort—like changing the
coax feeds, or physically digging up the verticals and repositioning them.
Fortunately, there is a single solution to all three problems. Figure 11-3 shows a
two-port phasing transformer made from a toroidal balun kit. Use the kind of kit that
makes a 1:1 balun transformer. Although we are not making a balun, we will need
enough wire to make three windings, and that is the normal case for 1:1 baluns. Amidon Associates and others make toroidal balun kits.
Wind the three coils in trifilar style, according to the kit instructions. The dots in
Fig. 11-3 show the “sense” of the coils, and they are important for correct phasing;
call one end the “dot end” and the other end the “plain end” to keep them separate.
If the dot end of the first coil is connected to J3 (and the transmitter), then connect
the dot end of the second coil to the 0° output (J1, which goes to antenna A). The
third coil is connected to a DPDT RF relay or switch. In the position shown, S1
causes the antennas to be 180° out of phase. In the other position, the “sense” of the
third coil is reversed, so the antennas are in phase.
Another phasing method is shown in Fig. 11-4. In this scheme, two convenient,
but equal, lengths of coaxial cable (L1 and L2) are used to carry RF power to the antennas. One segment (L1) is fed directly from the transmitter’s coaxial cable (L3),
while the other is fed from a phasing switch. The phasing switch is used to either by-

Chap11_Carr

4/10/01

3:36 PM

Page 250

250 Directional phased vertical antennas
J1
antenna A
J3
transmitter
J2
antenna B
L1A

L1B

L1C

S1
11-3A Phasing transformer circuit.

pass or insert a phase-shifting length of coaxial cable (L4). For 180° phasing use the
following equation to find the length (L4):
492 VF
L =  ft
FMHz

[11.1]

where
L is the length of L4, in feet
VF is the velocity factor (a decimal fraction)
FMHz is the operating frequency, in megahertz
Some people use a series of switches to select varying amounts of phasing shift
from 45° to 270°. Such a switch allows them to select any number of other patterns
for special situations.

360° directional array
The phased vertical antenna concept can be used to provide round-the-compass
control of the antenna pattern. Figure 11-5A shows how three quarter-wavelength
verticals (arranged in a triangle that is a half-wavelength on each side) can be used
to provide either end-fire or broadside patterns from any pair (A-B, A-C, or B-C).
Any given antenna (A, B, or C) will be grounded, fed at 0°, or fed with 180°. The
table in Fig. 11-5B shows the relative phasing for each direction that was labelled in
Fig. 11-5A. Either manual phase changing or switch-operated phase changing can be
used, although the latter is preferred for convenience. Some international showcase
broadcasters use antenna arrays formed into two or more concentric circles of vertical elements, with one element at the center. Selection of elements and phasing determines directivity and gain.

Chap11_Carr

4/10/01

3:36 PM

Page 251

360° directional array 251
A

B

/4

/4

/2

Length  D1  D2

D1

D2

J1
J3
Phasing
transformer

11-3B Connection to antennas.

J2

Chap11_Carr

4/10/01

3:36 PM

Page 252

252 Directional phased vertical antennas
A

B
L4

L1

L2

L3

11-4 Phase-shifting antenna circuit.

Chap11_Carr

4/10/01

3:36 PM

Page 253

360° directional array 253
NW2
N

NE1

NW1

NE2
C

W

E
A

B
SE1

SW2
SE2
S
SW1
11-5A Three-element phased array.

Chap11_Carr

4/10/01

3:36 PM

Page 254

254 Directional phased vertical antennas

Direction

Ant
A

Ant
B

Ant
C

N-S

0°

0°

GND

NE1-SW1

0°

GND

180°

NE2-SW2

GND

0°

0°

E-W

0°

180°

GND

SE1-NW1

0°

GND

0°

SE2-NW2

GND

0°

180°

11-5B Table of feed phasing
for the three-element
array. Ant = antenna.
GND = ground

12

CHAPTER

Directional beam
antennas
THE DIRECTIONAL BEAM ANTENNA DOES SEVERAL JOBS. FIRST, IT PROVIDES AN APPARENT

increase in radiated power, because it focuses available transmitter power into a single (or at worst limited) direction. For this reason, a bidirectional dipole has a gain
of approximately 2 dB over an isotropic radiator. Add one or more additional elements, and the focusing becomes nearly unidirectional, which increases the effective radiated power (ERP) even more. Second, the beam increases the received
signal available at the inputs of the receiver. Antennas are generally reciprocal, so
they will work for receiving as they do for transmitting. Finally, the directivity of the
beam antenna allows the operator to null interfering stations. In fact, it is the last attribute of the beam that is most useful on today’s crowded bands. All in all, if your
funds are too little to provide both increased RF power and a good antenna system,
then spend what is available on the antenna—not on the power.
In this chapter we will focus on directional antennas that can be built relatively
easily. It is assumed that most readers who want a triband multielement Yagi will
prefer to buy a commercial product, rather than build a homebrew model. The material herein concentrates on homebrew projects that are within the reach and
capabilities of most readers. The first of these is not a beam antenna at all, but
rather a rotatable dipole.

Rotatable dipole
The dipole is a bidirectional antenna with a figure-8 pattern (when viewed from
above). The dipole is a half-wavelength and is usually installed horizontally, although
vertical half-wavelength dipoles are known. Although the length of the dipole is too
great for rotatability at the lower bands, it is within reason for the higher band. For
example, the size of the halfwave dipole is approximately 16 ft on 10 m and 22 ft on
15 m. Even the 33-ft length on 20 m is not unreasonable for amateur constructors.
The length of the dipole is found from

Copyright 2001 - the McGraw-Hill Companies

255

Chap12_Carr

4/10/01

3:30 PM

Page 256

256 Directional beam antennas
468
L   ft
FMHz

[12.1]

This length is approximate because of end effects and other phenomena, so
some “cut and try” is required.
Example 12-1 Find the length of a dipole antenna for a frequency of 24.930
MHz in the 12-m amateur radio band.
Solution:
468
L   ft
:
FMHz
468
 
 18.77 ft
24.930 MHz
The half-wave dipole is fed in the center by coaxial cable. Each element of the
dipole is one-half of the overall length (or, in the example given, about 9.4 ft).
Figure 12-1 shows a rotatable dipole that can be designed for use on 15, 12, and
10 m. The radiator elements are made from 10-ft lengths of 3⁄4-in aluminum tubing.
The tubing is mounted on “beehive” standoff insulators, which in turn are mounted
on a 4-ft length of 2  2 lumber. The lumber should be varnished against weathering. In
a real pinch, the elements can be mounted directly to the lumber without the insulators,
but this is not the recommended practice.
The mast is attached to the 2  2 lumber through any of several means. The preferred method is the use of a 1-in pipe flange. These devices are available at hardware
stores under the names floor flange and right-angle flange.
The 10-ft lengths of pipe are the standard lengths available in hardware stores,
so it was selected as being closest to the required 22 ft for 15 m. A 0.14-µH loading
coil is used at the center, between the elements, in order to make up for the short
length. The dimensions of the coil are 4 to 5 turns, 0.5-in diameter, 4-in length. For low
power levels, the coil can be made of no. 10 (or no. 12) solid wire—and, for higher levels, 1⁄8-in copper tubing.
There are two basic ways to feed the antenna, and these are shown in details
A and B in Fig. 12-1. The traditional method is to connect the coaxial cable (in parallel)
across the inductor. This method is shown in Fig. 12-1, detail A. A second method is to
link couple the coil to the line through a one- to three-turn loop (as needed for impedance matching). This is the method that would be used for a toroidal inductor.
Lower frequencies can be accommodated by changing the dimensions of the
coil. The coil cannot be scaled, simply because the relative length of the antenna
changes as the frequency changes. But it is possible to cut and try by adding turns to
the coil, one turn at a time, and remeasuring the resonant frequency. Adding inductance to the coil will make the antenna usable on 17 m and 20 m, as well as on 15 m.
Another method for building a rotatable dipole for lower frequencies is to increase the element lengths. On 17 m, the overall length is approximately 27.4 ft, so
each element length is 13.7 ft long. This length can be achieved by either of two
methods. First, adjacent sizes of aluminum tubing are designed so that the smaller
will be a slip-fit inside of the larger. What constitutes “adjacent sizes” depends on the
wall thickness, but for one common brand, the 7⁄8-in is adjacent to the 3⁄4-in size. You

Chap12_Carr

4/10/01

3:30 PM

Page 257

Yagi beam antennas 257
L  0.14 µH @15 m
L
10 ft  3/4 in

10 ft  3/4 in

2 in  2 in  4 ft Wood
1 in Pipe flange

Mast

A

B

12-1 Rotatable dipole antenna. Inset A shows conventional feed; inset B shows transformer feed.

can use two smaller lengths to make the larger lengths of pipe, and cut it to size. This
method is only available to those readers who have a commercial or industrial metals distributor nearby, because the 16-ft lengths are not generally available from
hardware stores.
Bands higher than 15 m (i.e., 12 and 10 m) can be accommodated by using the
10-ft lengths of tubing, but without the inductor. The tubing is cut to the desired
half-wavelength size and used directly.

Yagi beam antennas
A Yagi antenna is one member of a class of directional beam antennas that are popular in the HF bands. Figure 12-2 shows the pattern (viewed from above) typical of
the beam antenna. The antenna is located at point P and fires signals in the direction
shown by the arrow. The beamwidth of the antenna is the angle a between the points
on the main lobe that are 3 dB down from the center point C.

Chap12_Carr

4/10/01

3:30 PM

Page 258

258 Directional beam antennas
Direction of
propagation

Main lobe

C

3 dB

3 dB

a

12-2 Pattern of beam antenna.

Sidelobe

P

Backlobe

A perfect beam antenna will have only the main lobe, but that situation occurs only
in dreams. All real antennas have both sidelobes and backlobes, also shown in Fig. 12-2.
These lobes represent wasted power transmitted in the wrong direction during transmission and interference opportunities while receiving. The goal of the antenna
designer is to increase the main lobe while decreasing the sidelobes and backlobes.
Figure 12-3 shows, schematically, the basic Yagi-Uda antenna (usually called
simply Yagi). The driven element is a simple half-wavelength dipole fed in the
center. There are two additional elements: reflectors and directors. These are
called parasitic elements because they are not directly excited by RF, but rather,

Chap12_Carr

4/10/01

3:30 PM

Page 259

Yagi beam antennas 259
they receive energy radiated from the driven element and then reradiate it. The
reflector is placed behind the driven element, and is typically about 4 percent
longer than the driven element. The director is placed in front of the driven element (relative to the direction of propagation). The director is typically about 4
percent shorter than the driven element. Although there is no fixed rule regarding the number of either reflectors or directors, it is common practice to use a single director and a driven element for two-element beams, and a single reflector
and a single director, in addition to the driven element, for three-element beams.
Again, additional reflectors can be added for four- and more element beams, but
standard practice calls for addition of directors instead.
The length of the elements is given by
K
L ft
[12.2]
FMHz
where
L is the length, in feet
FMHz is the frequency, in megahertz
K is a constant
The spacing of the elements is typically from 0.15 to 0.308 wavelengths, although 0.2 and 0.25 are the most common values.

Direction of
propagation

D1

Director

S
Driven
element

DR
Feedpoint

S

Reflector

R
12-3 Basic Yagi-Uda antenna.

Chap12_Carr

4/10/01

3:30 PM

Page 260

260 Directional beam antennas
Example Calculate the approximate element lengths for a three-element 15m beam designed to operate on a frequency of 21.39 MHz.
Solution:
1. Driven element (K  478):

K
L   ft
FMHz
478
  ft
21.39 MHz
 22.34 ft

2. Reflector (K  492):

K
L   ft
FMHz
492
  ft
21.39 MHz
 23 ft

3. Director (K  461.5):

K
L   ft
FMHz
461.5
  ft
21.39 MHz
 21.58 ft

4. Element Spacing (K  142):

K
L   ft
FMHz
142
 
ft
21.39 MHz
 6.64 ft

The elements of a rotatable beam antenna can be built in a manner similar to the
rotatable dipole described earlier. In the beam antenna, however, a boom is needed
between the elements to support them. The boom can be made of metal or wood. In
the case of a metal boom, the driven element must be insulated from the boom, even
though the parasitic elements can be mounted directly to it. In general, it is usually
better to use wood as a matter of convenience. Metal boom antennas can be obtained
from commercial sources. The wood boom is easy to build and maintain, even though
a little less durable than a metal boom.
The feedpoint impedance of a dipole is on the order of 72 Ω in free space, although the actual impedance will vary above and below that figure for antennas
close to the earth’s surface. In addition, adding parasitic elements reduces the impedance even more. The feedpoint impedance of the antenna is too low to be
directly fed with coaxial cable, so some means of impedance matching is needed.
Some people feed the antenna through an impedance matching balun transformer.
Figure 12-4 shows the gamma match system. The driven element of the Yagi is not

4/10/01

3:31 PM

Page 261

Yagi beam antennas 261
broken in the center, as in the case of the simple dipole. The outer conductor, or
shield, of the coaxial cable is connected to the center point of the driven element.
The center conductor is connected to the gamma match element. The dimensions of
the gamma match are
1. Gamma match length: L/10
2. Gamma match director: D/3
3. Spacing of gamma match from driven element: L/70
where
L is the length of the driven element
D is the diameter of the driven element
The capacitor in series with the center conductor of the coaxial cable has a value
of approximately 8 pF per meter of wavelength at the lowest frequency in the band
of operation, or approximately,
2400
C   pF
FMHz

[12.3]

The capacitor must be a high-voltage transmitting variable type. In general, the
gamma match capacitors are either air or vacuum variables.
There are three aspects to the adjustment of the Yagi antenna. Resonance is determined by the length of the element. The length is increased or decreased in order
to find the resonant point. This point can be determined by the use of a noise bridge,
VSWR meter or other means. The capacitor, and the shorting bar/clamp, are adjusted to match the impedance of the antenna to the transmission line impedance.
For the dimensions shown, the coaxial cable should be 52 Ω (RG-58 or RG-8).
It is not necessary to use tubing or pipes for the antenna elements in order to obtain
the benefits of the Yagi beam antenna. An example of a wire beam is shown in Fig. 12-5.
The wire beam is made as if it were two half-wavelength dipoles, installed parallel to and
about 0.2 to 0.25 wavelengths apart from each other. Although multielement wire beams
are possible, the two-element version is the most common. Perhaps the most frequent
L

D

Center

Chap12_Carr

Shorting clamp

L/70

Insulator

D/3
L=

K Feet
FMHz

C
L/10

C=

8 pF
Meter()

12-4 Gamma feed provides impedance matching.

Chap12_Carr

4/10/01

3:31 PM

Page 262

262 Directional beam antennas
use of the wire beam antenna is on the lower bands (e.g., 40 m and 75/80 m) where rotatable beams are more difficult to build.

20-m ZL-special beam
The antenna shown in Fig. 12-6 is a close relative of the Yagi beam. It consists of a
pair of folded dipoles, mounted approximately 0.12 wavelengths apart. The elements
are 30.5 ft in length, and the spacing is 7.1 ft. The elements can be built from aluminum tubing if the antenna is to be rotatable. Alternatively, for a fixed antenna, the
elements can be made of 300-Ω television-type twin lead. If the tubing type of construction is selected, then make the size of the tubing, and its spacing, sufficient for
300-Ω parallel transmission lines, according to
2S
Zo276 log 
d
Insulators
Rope

Insulators
Rope

Insulators
Rope

0.96L

Insulators
Rope

Driven element

L
(Top view)

12-5 Wire beam useful for low frequencies.
30.5'

BALUN

2:1

Coax
7.1"

[12.4]

7.2' of
300-
cable

Connections
twisted

12-6 ZL-special beam antenna.

Chap12_Carr

4/10/01

3:31 PM

Page 263

Cubical quad beam antenna 263
where
Zo is the impedance of the line (300 Ω)
S is the center-to-center spacing of the parallel conductors on the elements
d is the diameter of the conductors
The two half-wavelength elements of the ZL-special are fed 135° out of phase
with each other. The feedline is connected to one of the dipoles directly; and then to
the other through a length of 300-Ω twin lead that has an electrical length of about
45° (/8).
The feedpoint impedance is on the order of 100 to 150 Ω, so it will make a good
match to either 52- or 75-Ω coaxial cable if a 2:1 impedance matching transformer is
used.

Cubical quad beam antenna
The cubical quad antenna is a one-wavelength square wire loop. It was designed in
the mid-1940s at radio station HCJB in Quito, Ecuador. HCJB is a Protestant missionary shortwave radio station with worldwide coverage. The location of the station
is at a high altitude. This fact makes the Yagi antenna less useful than it is at lower
altitudes. According to the story, HCJB originally used Yagi antennas. These antennas are fed in the center at a current loop, so the ends are high-voltage loops. In the
thin air of Quito, the high voltage at the ends caused corona arcing, and that arcing
periodically destroyed the tips of the Yagi elements. Station engineer Clarence
Moore designed the cubical quad antenna (Fig. 12-7) to solve this problem. Because
it is a full-wavelength antenna, each side being a quarter wavelength, and fed at a
current loop in the center of one side, the voltage loops occur in the middle of the
adjacent sides—and that reduces or eliminates the arcing. The elements can be fed
in the center of a horizontal side (Figs. 12-7A and 12-8A), in the center of a vertical
side (Fig. 12-8B), or at the corner (Fig. 12-8C).
The antenna shown in Fig. 12-7A is actually a quad loop rather than a cubical
quad. Two or more quad loops, only one of which needs to be fed by the coax, are
used to make a cubical quad antenna. If only this one element is used, then the antenna will have a figure-8 azimuthal radiation pattern (similar to a dipole). The quad
loop antenna is preferred by many people over a dipole for two reasons. First, the
quad loop has a smaller “footprint” because it is only a quarter-wavelength on each
side (A in Fig. 12-7A). Second, the loop form makes it somewhat less susceptible to
local electromagnetic interference (EMI).
The quad loop antenna (and the elements of a cubical quad beam) is mounted
to spreaders connected to a square gusset plate. At one time, carpets were wrapped
around bamboo stalks, and those could be used for quad antennas. Those days are
gone, however, and today it is necessary to buy fiberglass quad spreaders. A number
of kits are advertised in ham radio magazines.
The details for the gusset plate are shown in Fig. 12-7B. The gusset plate is made
of a strong insulating material such as fiberglass or 3⁄4-in marine-grade plywood. It is
mounted to a support mast using two or three large U bolts (stainless steel to prevent corrosion). The spreaders are mounted to the gusset plate using somewhat
smaller U bolts (again, use stainless steel U bolts to prevent corrosion damage).

Chap12_Carr

4/10/01

3:31 PM

Page 264

264 Directional beam antennas

12-7A Quad loop antenna.

12-7B Quad loop antenna.

Chap12_Carr

4/10/01

3:31 PM

Page 265

Cubical quad beam antenna 265

X X

A

X
X

X X

B

C
12-8 Feed options for the quad.

There is a running controversy regarding how the antenna compares with other
beam antennas, particularly the Yagi. Some experts claim that the cubical quad has
a gain of about 1.5 to 2 dB higher than a Yagi (with a comparable boom length between the two elements). In addition, some experts claim that the quad has a lower
angle of radiation. Most experts agree that the quad seems to work better at low
heights above the earth’s surface, but the difference disappears at heights greater
than a half-wavelength.
The quad can be used as either a single-element antenna or in the form of a
beam. Figure 12-9 shows a pair of elements spaced 0.13 to 0.22 wavelengths apart.
One element is the driven element, and it is connected to the coaxial-cable feedline
directly. The other element is a reflector, so it is a bit longer than the driven element.
A tuning stub is used to adjust the reflector loop to resonance.
Because the wire is arranged into a square loop, one wavelength long, the actual
length varies from the naturally resonant length by about 3 percent. The driven

Chap12_Carr

4/10/01

3:31 PM

Page 266

266 Directional beam antennas

Driven element
S
Reflector

12-9 Quad beam antenna.

Tuning stub
0.13  S  0.22

element is about 3 percent longer than the natural resonant point. The overall
lengths of the wire elements are
1. Driven element:

1005
L   ft
FMHz

[12.5]

2. Reflector:

1030
L   ft
FMHz

[12.6]

3. Director:

975
L   ft
FMHz

[12.7]

One method for the construction of the quad beam antenna is shown in
Fig. 12-10. This particular scheme uses a 12  12-in wooden plate at the center,
bamboo (or fiberglass) spreaders, and a wooden (or metal) boom. The construction must be heavy-duty in order to survive wind loads. For this reason, it is probably a better solution to buy a quad kit consisting of the spreaders and the center
structural element.

Chap12_Carr

4/10/01

3:31 PM

Page 267

Inverted bobtail curtain (Thorne array) 267
More than one band can be installed on a single set of spreaders. The size of the
spreaders is set by the lowest band of operation, so higher frequency bands can
be accommodated with shorter loops on the same set of spreaders.
This quad antenna is an example of a multielement, large loop antenna. Additional
information on large loops, but not in a beam antenna array, is found in Chap. 14.

Inverted bobtail curtain (Thorne array)
The bobtail curtain antenna is a fixed array consisting of three individual quarterwavelength elements spaced a half-wavelength apart, and fed from the top by a

Boom
12-10 Quad construction.

Mast

Chap12_Carr

4/10/01

3:31 PM

Page 268

268 Directional beam antennas
shorting element or wire. The inverted bobtail curtain, or Thorne array, consists
of an upside down bobtail curtain as shown in Fig. 12-11. The radiator elements are
each a quarter-wavelength long. Their lengths are found from
246
L   ft
FMHz

[12.8]

The lengths of spacing between the elements are exactly twice above the value,
or
492
L   ft
FMHz

[12.9]

The antenna is fed at the base of the center element, through a parallel resonant
tuner. The capacitor is a 100- to 200-pF transmitting variable, while the inductor is
set to resonate at the band desired (with the capacitor at half to three-quarters full
capacitance). A loop or link coupling scheme connects the tuner to the transmission
line.
An alternate feed method (Fig. 12-12) worked out by the late J. H. Thorne
(K4NFU/5), feeds the end elements from the shield of the coaxial cable, and the center element of the array is fed from the center conductor of the coaxial cable. A coaxial impedance-matching section is used between the cable transmitter and the
antenna feedpoint.


2


4


2


4

L

12-11 Inverted bobtail curtain.


4

Chap12_Carr

4/10/01

3:31 PM

Page 269

Inverted bobtail curtain (Thorne array) 269

2


/
22


4

Matching
section
(75 )

Coax to
XTMR
(52 )
12-12 Thorne array.

This page intentionally left blank

13

CHAPTER

Antennas for
shortwave reception
ALTHOUGH MOST OF THIS BOOK ADDRESSES ANTENNAS FOR TRANSMITTING, THERE IS A
certain body of material that pertains purely to receiving antennas. This material
also needs to be addressed, and that is the function of this chapter. There are two
readers in mind for this chapter. First, and foremost, is the shortwave listener
(SWL). Second, however, is the amateur radio operator who wants to either use a
separate receiving antenna on the main station receiver or use an ancillary receiver
(common among DXers).

The law of reciprocity
Antennas possess a property called reciprocity. That is a fancy way of saying that an
antenna works on reception the same way it does for transmission. Although articles
occasionally appear in the literature claiming an HF or VHF design which violates the
law of reciprocity, to date all have depended on either variable definitions, false
premises, or faulty measurements. There is even a school of thought that falsely
argues against antenna reciprocity based on an ionospheric anomaly in which propagation depends on the direction traveled (see the end of Chap. 2). The bottom line
of reciprocity, for the SWL, is that every antenna described in this book can be also
used with equal results on receive. For example, a half-wavelength dipole works
equally well as a receiver antenna, or as a transmitter antenna.

Which properties are important?
Selecting a receiver antenna is a function of several factors. Assuming that you
want more than a simple longwire (which we will deal with shortly), you will want
to home in on the properties desired for your particular monitoring application. Is
the antenna to be fixed or rotatable? Do you want omnidirectional or directional reception? In which plane? What about gain?

Copyright 2001 - the McGraw-Hill Companies

271

Chap13_Carr

4/10/01

3:34 PM

Page 272

272 Antennas for shortwave reception
What about gain? What is gain, for that matter? The concept of antenna gain derives from the fact that directional antennas focus energy. Two kinds of gain figure
are often quoted: gain referenced to a dipole antenna on the same frequency, and
gain relative to a theoretical construct called an isotropic radiator. In the isotropic
case, the reference radiator to which the antenna is compared is a spherical point
source that radiates equally well in all directions. The dipole exhibits a figure-8 radiation and reception pattern.
The gain of an antenna is merely the ratio (usually expressed in decibels) of the
power radiated in a given direction by two antennas (i.e., the reference antenna and
the test antenna). If an antenna gain is listed as “8-dB gain over isotropic,” this
means that, in the direction specified, the power radiated is 8 dB higher than the
same total power applied to an isotropic radiator.
So, of what use is antenna gain? Two answers immediately present themselves.
First, by accumulating more signal, the antenna essentially makes your receiver
more sensitive. Note that the gain of the antenna does not create a higher powered
signal, it merely increases the apparent signal power by focusing energy from a given
direction. And, note well that gain implies directivity. Any antenna that claims to
provide gain, but that is truly omnidirectional in all planes, is a fraud. The fundamental assumption is that gain implies directivity.
The concept of directivity (hence also of gain) is often taken to mean horizontal directivity, which is the case of a dipole antenna. But all forms of antenna radiate in three-dimensional space. Azimuth angle of radiation, and elevation angle of
radiation, are both important. Certain 2-m vertical antennas are listed as “gain antennas,” yet the pattern in the horizontal direction is 360°—implying omnidirectional behavior. In the vertical plane, however, lost energy is compressed into a
smaller range of elevation angles, so gain occurs by refocusing energy that would
have been radiated at a higher than useful angle.
The second application of directivity is in suppressing interfering signals. On
the regular AM and FM broadcast bands, channelization permits receiver selectivity to overcome adjacent channel interference in most cases. But in the HF amateur
radio and international broadcast bands, channelization is either nonexistent,
poorly defined, or ignored altogether. In these cases, interfering “adjacent” channel
signals can wipe out a weaker, desired station. Similarly, with cochannel interference (i.e., when both stations are on the same frequency), two or more signals
compete in a “dog fight” that neither will ever totally win. Consider Fig. 13-1A. Assume that two 9540-kHz signals, S1 and S2, arrive at the same omnidirectional vertical antenna. Either both signals will be heard, or the stronger signal will drown
out the weaker signal.
Now, consider Fig. 13-1B. Here, a dipole is used as the receiving antenna, so a little directivity is obtained. The main lobes of the dipole are wide enough to provide
decent reception of signal S1, even though the antenna is positioned such that S1 is
not along the maximum line (dotted). But the positioning shown places the interfering cochannel signal (S2) in the null off the ends of the dipole, so it weakens it considerably. The result will be enhanced reception of S1. In Fig. 13-1B, the idea is not
to exploit the ability of the gain antenna to increase the level of S1. Indeed, by placing the antenna as shown, we are not getting S1 levels as high as might otherwise be

Chap13_Carr

4/10/01

3:34 PM

Page 273

Which properties are important? 273
S2

13-1A Omnidirectional antenna
picks up cochannel interfering signals equally well.

S1

Antenna

S1

S2
13-1B Directional antenna can
discriminate against
unwanted signal.

Chap13_Carr

4/10/01

3:34 PM

Page 274

274 Antennas for shortwave reception
possible. The idea here is to place the unwanted signal (S2) into the “notch” in order
to make it considerably weaker. Note that the notch is sharper than the peak of the
main lobe. If the dipole is placed on a mast, with an antenna rotator, this ability is increased even more.
Another antenna parameter, of considerable interest, is angle of radiation a,
which (by reciprocity) also means angle of reception. Because HF propagation over
long distances is created by skip phenomena, the angle at which the signal hits the
ionosphere becomes extremely important. Figure 13-2 shows two situations from
the same station. Signal S1 has a high angle of radiation (a1), so its skip distance (D1)
is relatively short. On signal S2, however, the angle of radiation (a2) is low, so the skip
distance (D2) is much longer than D1.
So which situation do you want in your antenna? The impulsive answer would be
the long distance angle of radiation (a 2), but that is often wrong. The correct answer
is: “It depends!” The desired angle of radiation is a function of whether you want to
receive a station from point A or point B.
The angle of radiation of the antenna is fixed by its design, that is, by antenna
physics. The desired angle is a function of the ionospheric properties at the time of
interest, and the operating frequency. For this reason, some well-equipped radio
hobbyists have several antennas, of differing properties, to enhance their listening.

Connection to the receiver
It’s simply too naive to state, I suppose, but let’s do it anyway: An antenna must be
properly connected to the receiver before it can be effective. If your antenna uses
coaxial cable, and the receiver accepts coax, then no discussion is needed: Attach

ere

S

2

S1

Ionosph

a1

a2
A
D1

B
D2

13-2 Skip phenomena dependence on angle of radiation.

Chap13_Carr

4/10/01

3:34 PM

Page 275

Connection to the receiver 275
the proper coax connector and plug in. But in other cases, non-coaxial-cable antennas are used.
There are two major forms of antenna input connector used on shortwave receivers. One form uses two (or three) screws intended for either wrapped wire leads
or spade lugs, while the other is one or more varieties of coaxial connector. This section covers how each type is connected to a single-wire antenna lead-in.
Consider first the screw-type connector (Fig. 13-3A). Depending upon the design, there will be either two or three screws. If only two screws are found, then
one is for the antenna wire and the other is for the ground wire. These screws will
be marked something like “A/G” or “ANT/GND,” or with the schematic symbols for
antenna and ground.
Three-screw designs are intended to accommodate balanced transmission lines
such as twin lead, or parallel ladder line. Shortwave listeners can sometimes use ordinary ac line cord (called zipcord) as an antenna transmission line. Zipcord has an
impedance that approximates the 75-Ω impedance of a dipole. When parallel lines of
any type are used, connect one lead to A1 and the other to A2. Of course, the ground
terminal (G) is connected to the earth ground.
For single-lead antenna lines connect a jumper wire or bar (i.e., a short piece of
bare no. 22 solid hookup wire) between A2 and G. This jumper converts the balanced input line to unbalanced. The A2/G terminal is connected to earth ground,
while A1 is connected to the single-lead antenna wire.

A1

A2

G

Antenna
wire
Jumper

13-3A Connection of wire antenna to balanced antenna terminals on receiver.

Chap13_Carr

4/10/01

3:34 PM

Page 276

276 Antennas for shortwave reception
On receivers that use an SO-239 coaxial connector, we can use either of two techniques to connect a single-lead wire. First, we can obtain the mating PL-259 plug, and
solder the antenna lead to the center conductor pin. The PL-259 connector is then
screwed into the mating SO-239 chassis connector. Regardless of the type of coaxial
connector, however, the mate can be used for the antenna lead wire. But for SO-239
connectors another alternative is also available. Figure 13-3B shows a “banana plug”
attached to the lead wire and inserted into the receptacle of the SO-239.

DANGER!
Certain low-cost receivers, especially older vacuum-tube models, have a so-called
ac/dc or transformerless internal dc power supply. On most receivers, the dc common is the chassis, which also serves as the RF signal common. But on ac/dc models the neutral wire of the ac power line serves as the dc common, and it is kept
floating as a “counterpoise” ground above the chassis ground used by the RF signals. A capacitor (C1 in Fig. 13-4) sets the chassis and counterpoise ground at 0V RF potential, while keeping the counterpoise isolated for dc and 60 Hz ac. A
danger exists if either the ac plug is installed backwards or someone plugs the
socket in the wall incorrectly (often happens!). Even if C1 is intact, a nasty shock
can be felt by touching the antenna ground (G or GND) terminal. The capacitive reactance of C1 is about 2.7 MΩ for 60-Hz ac, so at least a “bite” is going to
happen. But if that capacitor is shorted, which is likely on older receivers, then
the bite is considerably worse, and might even prove fatal. The problem, in that
case, is that reversed ac line polarity will set the hot line from the ac socket on the
ground lead. The least to expect is massive fireworks and a possible fire hazard;
the most to expect is a fire, and your possible electrocution.
The usual advice given to owners of such radios is to make sure that C1 is intact before using the radio. I prefer a better solution: buy, install, and use a
120:120 Vac isolation transformer to isolate your receiver from the ac power lines.
Such a transformer is standard practice in repair shops, and it should also be standard practice in your house.

SO-239

13-3B Connection of wire antenna to coaxial
input receiver.
Wire
Banana plug

Chap13_Carr

4/10/01

3:34 PM

Page 277

Wire antennas 277
RF
input
circuit
A1

A2
C1
0.001 F
G

Earth
ground

Chassis
ground

Counterpoise power common

Neutral


DC
power
supply

115 Vac
Hot

13-4 Dangerous form of antenna/receiver circuitry.

Wire antennas
This section reviews simple wire antennas that are suitable for the reception of
shortwave signals, although not necessarily for transmitting. Once again, you are reminded that the law of reciprocity permits you to use any transmitting antenna
found in other chapters for receiving also.
Figure 13-5 shows the common receiving longwire. The antenna element should
be 30 to 150 ft in length. Although most texts show it horizontal to the ground (and
indeed, a case can be made that performance is better that way), it is not strictly
necessary. If you must slope the wire, then it is doubtful that you will notice any reception problems.
The far end of the wire is attached to a supporting structure through an insulator
and a rope. The support structure can be another building, a tree, or a mast installed
especially for this purpose. Chapter 28 deals with antenna construction practices.
Wind will cause motion in the antenna wire and its supporting structure. Over
time, the wind movement will fatigue the antenna wire and cause it to break. Also, if
a big enough gust of wind (or a sustained storm) comes along, then even a new antenna can either sag badly or break altogether. You can do either of two things to reduce the problem. First, as shown in Fig. 13-5, a door spring can be used to provide
a little variable slack in the wire. The spring tension is selected to be only partially
expanded under normal conditions, so wind will increase the tension, and stretch
the spring. Make sure that the spring is not too strong to be stretched by the action
of wind on the antenna, or no good is accomplished.

Chap13_Carr

4/10/01

3:34 PM

Page 278

278 Antennas for shortwave reception

House
Screw
eyelet

Mast, tree or
other support

30 to 150 feet
antenna wire

Rope

Insulator
Downlead

Insulator

Lightning
arrestor
Window

Ground
wire

RX

Antenna
wire

Screw
eyelet

Doorspring
or
counterweight

Ground
tab

Ground rod

13-5 Longwire SWL antenna.

Another tactic is to replace the spring with a counterweight that is heavy enough
to keep the antenna nearly taut under normal conditions, but not so heavy that it
fails to move under wind conditions. In other words, the antenna tension should exactly balance the counterweight under normal conditions, and not be too great that
it stretches the antenna wire excessively.
The antenna wire should be either no. 12 or no. 14 hard-drawn copper, or Copperweld stranded wire. The latter is actually steel-core wire, but has a copper coating
on the outside. Because of skin effect, RF signals flow only in the outer copper coating. Soft-drawn copper wire will stretch and break prematurely, so it should be
avoided.
The downlead of the antenna must be insulated, and it should also be stranded
wire (which breaks less easily than solid wire). Again, no. 12 or no. 14 wire should be
used, although no. 16 would be permissible. The point where the downlead and antenna are joined should be soldered to prevent corrosion of the joint. Mechanical
strength is provided by proper splicing technique (see Fig. 13-6). Do not depend on
the solder for mechanical strength, for it has none.
There are several ways to bring a downlead into the building. First, if you can
tolerate a slight crack in the junction of the sash and sill, then run the wire underneath the sash and close the window. Alternatively, you can buy a flat strap connector to pass under the window. This method is electrically the same as running the
lead, but is mechanically nicer. Chapter 28 deals with several methods, and should
be consulted.

Grounding
The ground lead should be a heavy conductor, such as heavy wire or braid. The
shield stripped from RG-8 or RG-11 coaxial cable is suitable for most applications.
For reception purposes only, the ground may be a cold-water pipe inside the house.
Do not use the hot-water pipes (which are not well grounded) or gas pipes (which

Chap13_Carr

4/10/01

3:34 PM

Page 279

Vertical antennas 279
Insulator
Solder

Antenna wire

Insulated downlead

13-6 Construction details.

are dangerous to use). Also, be aware that residential air conditioner liquid lines look
like copper cold-water pipes in some cases. Don’t use them. Chapter 29 deals with
grounding.
The lightning arrester is a safety precaution, and it must be used! Its purpose is
to supply an alternative path to ground in the event of a lightning strike. Although at
least one text calls the arrester optional, it is not. Besides the obvious safety reasons
(which are reason enough), there are also legal and economic reasons for using
the arrester. Your local government building and/or fire codes might require a lightning arrester for outdoor antennas. Also, your insurance company might not honor
your homeowner’s policy if the lightning arrester (required by local code) is not
used. The antenna lightning arrester is not optional, so use it.
WARNING! DO NOT EVER ATTEMPT TO INSTALL AN ANTENNA BY CROSSING A POWER LINE! EVER! NO MATTER WHAT YOU BELIEVE OR WHAT YOUR
FRIENDS TELL YOU, IT’S NEVER SAFE AND IT COULD KILL YOU.
The rest of this discussion touches on antennas, other than the receiver longwire. Because construction details are similar, we will not repeat them. You are, by
the way, encouraged to also read Chap. 28 to glean more details on antenna construction methods.

The flattop antenna
The “flattop” antenna is shown in Fig. 13-7. This antenna is a relative of the longwire,
with the exception that the downline is at the approximate center of the antenna
section. The flattop should be at least a half-wavelength (492/FMHz) at the lowest frequency of operation. The advantage of the flattop is that it allows the maximum use
of space in the configuration shown.

Vertical antennas
It is also possible to build shortwave listener antennas in vertical polarization.
Figure 13-8 shows one version of this type of antenna. The support (which could

Chap13_Carr

4/10/01

3:34 PM

Page 280

280 Antennas for shortwave reception
Insulator

Rope

Insulator

Rope

Downlead

Ground wire

13-7 Flattop SWL antenna.

Insulator

Support

13-8 Wire vertical SWL antenna—
works for hams too.

Insulator
Coax
or lead

Chap13_Carr

4/10/01

3:34 PM

Page 281

Wire directional antenna 281
be a tree or building) should have enough height to be at least a quarterwavelength on the lowest frequency of operation. The antenna is fed at the base
with coaxial cable. The center conductor of the coax is connected to the antenna
element, and the shield is connected to the ground rod at the base of the structure.
You are encouraged to see Chap. 10, which deals with limited space and hidden antennas, for a different version of this antenna. It is possible to install the wire (or
multiple wires of different lengths) inside of a length of PVC plumbing pipe. The
pipe serves as the support structure, and the conductors are placed inside.
Different lengths of conductor are required for different bands of operation. You
can calculate the length (in feet) required for quarter-wavelength vertical antennas
from Lft=246/FMHz. Figure 13-9A shows how several bands are accommodated from
the same feedline on the same support structure. In this particular case eight different antenna elements are supported from the same tee bar. Be sure to insulate them
from each other, and from the support structure. Again, PVC piping can be used for
the support. Another method for accommodating several different bands is to tie the
upper ends of the wires to a sloping rope (as in Fig. 13-9B).

Wire directional antenna
A directional antenna has the ability to enhance reception of desired signals, while rejecting undesired signals arriving from slightly different directions. Although
directivity normally means a beam antenna, or at least a rotatable dipole, there are certain types of antenna that allow fixed antennas to be both directive and variable. See
Chap. 7 for fixed but variable directional antennas and Chap. 11 for fixed and non-variable directive arrays. Those antennas are transmitting antennas, but they work equally
well for reception. This section shows a crude, but often effective, directional antenna
that allows one to select the direction of reception with pin plugs or switches.
Consider Fig. 13-10. In this case, a number of quarter-wavelength radiators are
fanned out from a common feedpoint at various angles from the building. At the near
end of each element is a female banana jack. A pair of balanced feedlines from the
receiver (300-Ω twin lead, or similar) are brought to the area where the antenna elements terminate. Each wire in the twin lead has a banana plug attached. By selecting which banana jack is plugged into which banana plug, you can select the
directional pattern of the antenna. If the receiver is equipped with a balanced antenna input, then simply connect the other end of the twin lead direction to the
receiver. Otherwise, use one of the couplers shown in Fig. 13-11.
Figure 13-11A shows a balanced antenna coupler that is tuned to the frequency of
reception. The coil is tuned to resonance by the interaction of the inductor and the capacitor. Antenna impedance is matched by selecting the taps on the inductor to which the
feedline is attached. A simple RF broadband coupler is shown in Fig. 13-11B. This transformer is wound over a ferrite core, and consists of 12 to 24 turns of no. 26 enameled
wire, with more turns being used for lower frequencies, and fewer for higher frequencies. Experiment with the number of turns in order to determine the correct value. Alternatively, use a 1:1 balun transformer instead of Fig. 13-11B; the type intended for
amateur radio antennas is overkill powerwise, but it will work nicely.

Chap13_Carr

4/10/01

3:34 PM

Page 282

282 Antennas for shortwave reception
Crossbar

Insulators

13-9A Multiband wire
vertical SWL antenna: tee bar style.

All wires
joined together

Chap13_Carr

4/10/01

3:34 PM

Page 283

Wire directional antenna 283

Rope

Wires

Ground rod

13-9B Multiband wire vertical SWL antenna: fan style.

Chap13_Carr

4/10/01

3:34 PM

Page 284

284 Antennas for shortwave reception

1

2

3 4 5
A B

6

7
See detail

Building

13-10 Directional SWL antenna (view from above).

The antenna of Fig. 13-10 works by phasing the elements so as to null, or enhance (as needed), certain directions. This operation becomes a little more flexible
if you build a phasing transformer, as shown in Fig. 13-11C and 13-11D. Windings L1,
L2, and L3 are wound “trifilar” style onto a ferrite core. Use 14 turns of no. 26 enameled wire for each winding. The idea in this circuit is to feed one element from coil
L2 in the same way all of the time. This port becomes the 0° phase reference. The
other port, B, is fed from a reversible winding, so it can either be in phase or 180° out
of phase with port A. Adjust the DPDT switch and the banana plugs of Fig. 13-10 for
the best reception.

Chap13_Carr

4/10/01

3:34 PM

Page 285

Wire directional antenna 285

A

RX
13-11A Antenna matching tuner.

B

A

13-11B Antenna matching transformer.

B

A

L1

B

L2

L3

C
13-11C Phase-switching antenna matcher.

Chap13_Carr

4/10/01

3:35 PM

Page 286

286 Antennas for shortwave reception

13-11D Phasing box permits phasing
antennas 0° to 180°.

14

CHAPTER

Large wire loop antennas
THERE ARE TWO BASIC FORMS OF LOOP ANTENNAS: SMALL AND LARGE. THESE TWO TYPES

have different characteristics, work according to different principles, and have different purposes. Small loops are those in which the current flowing in the wire has
the same phase and amplitude at every point in the loop (which fact implies a very
short wire length, i.e., less than 0.2␭). Such loops respond to the magnetic field component of the electromagnetic radio wave. A large loop antenna has a wire length
greater than 0.2␭, with most being either ␭/2, 1␭, or 2␭. The current in a large loop
varies along the length of the wire in a manner similar to other wire antennas.

␭/2 large loops
The performance of large wire loop antennas depends in part on their size. Figure 14-1
shows a half-wavelength loop (i.e., one in which the four sides are each ␭/8 long). There
are two basic configurations for this antenna: continuous (S1 closed) and open
(S1 open). In both cases, the feedpoint is at the midpoint of the side opposite the switch.
The direction of the main reception, or radiation lobe (i.e., the direction of maximum reception), depends on whether S1 is open or closed. With S1 closed, the main
lobe is to the right (solid arrow); and with S1 open, it is to the left (broken arrow). Direction reversal can be achieved by using a switch (or relay) at S1, although some
people opt for unidirectional operation by eliminating S1, and leaving the loop either
open or closed.
The feedpoint impedance is considerably different in the two configurations. In
the closed-loop situation (i.e., S1 closed), the antenna can be modeled as if it were a
half-wavelength dipole bent into a square and fed at the ends. The feedpoint (X1⫺X2)
impedance is on the order of 3 kΩ because it occurs at a voltage antinode (current
node). The current antinode (i.e., Imax) is at S1, on the side opposite the feedpoint. An
antenna tuning unit (ATU), or RF impedance transformer, must be used to match the
lower impedance of the transmission lines needed to connect to receivers.
The feedpoint impedance of the open-loop configuration (S1 open) is low because
the current antinode occurs at X1⫺X2. Some texts list the impedance as “about 50 Ω,”
but my own measurements on several test loops were somewhat higher (about 70 Ω).
In either case, the open loop is a reasonable match for either 52- or 75-Ω coaxial cable.
Copyright 2001 - the McGraw-Hill Companies

287

Chap14_Carr

4/10/01

3:32 PM

Page 288

288 Large wire loop antennas

8


8

X1
X2

S1


8


8
Direction of main lobe (S1 closed)
Direction of main lobe (S1 open)
14-1 Half-wave square loop antenna with reversal switch.

Neither /2 loop configuration shows gain over a dipole. The figure usually
quoted is 1-dB forward gain (i.e., a loss compared with a dipole), and about 6-dB
front-to-back ratio (FBR). Such low values of FBR indicate that there is no deep
notch (“null”) in the pattern.
A lossy antenna with a low FBR seems like a born loser, and in most cases it is.
But the /2 loop finds a niche where size must be constrained, for one reason or
another. In those cases, the /2 loop can be an alternative. These antennas can be
considered limited-space designs, and can be mounted in an attic, or other limitedaccess place, as appropriate.
A simple trick will change the gain, as well as the direction of radiation, of the
closed version of the /2 loop. In Fig. 14-2, a pair of inductors (L1 and L2) are inserted into the circuit at the midpoints of the sides adjacent to the side containing
the feedpoints. These inductors should have an inductive reactance XL of about 360
Ω in the center of the band of operation. The inductance of the coil is

Chap14_Carr

4/10/01

3:32 PM

Page 289

 /2 large loops 289
3.6  108
LµH  
2πFHz

[14.1]

where
L µH is the coil inductance, in microhenrys (µH)
FHz is the midband frequency, in hertz (Hz)
Example Find the inductance for the coils in a loaded half-wavelength closedloop antenna that must operate in a band centered on 10.125 MHz.
Solution:
[Note: 10.125 MHz  10,125,000 Hz]
3.6  108

LµH 
 5.7 µH
2π (10,125,000 Hz)
The coils force the current antinodes toward the feedpoint, reversing the direction of the main lobe, and creating a gain of about 1 dB over a half-wavelength
dipole.
The currents flowing in the antenna can be quite high, so when making the
coils, be sure to use a size that is sufficient for the power and current levels anticipated. The 2- to 3-in B&W Air-Dux style coils are sufficient for most amateur radio
use. Smaller coils are available on the market, but their use is limited to low-power
situations.

L1
XL = 370 

Maximum
reception

X1
X2

L2
XL = 370 
14-2 Use of inductive loading to reduce the size of antenna, and make the pattern more
uniform.

Chap14_Carr

4/10/01

3:32 PM

Page 290

290 Large wire loop antennas

1 large loops
If size is not forcing you to a /2 loop, then a 1 loop might be just the ticket. It
produces a gain of about 2 dB over a dipole in the directions that are perpendicular to the plane of the loop. The azimuth patterns formed by these antennas
are similar to the figure-8 pattern of the dipole. Three versions are shown: the square
loop (Fig. 14-3), the diamond loop (Fig. 14-4), and the delta loop (a.k.a. D-loop and
triangle—Fig. 14-5). The square and diamond loops are built with /4 on each
side, and the delta loop is /3 on each side. The overall length of wire needed to
build these antennas is
1005
Lfeet  
FMHz

[14.2]

The polarization of the three loop antennas is horizontal, because of the location
of the feedpoints. On the square loop, moving the feedpoint to the middle of either
vertical side will provide vertical polarization. Similarly, on the diamond loop vertical
polarization is realized by moving the feedpoint to either of the two adjacent apexes.
On the delta loop, placing the feedpoint at either of the two other apexes produces
a diagonal polarization that offers approximately equal vertical and horizontal polarization components.


4


4


4

X1 X2

4
14-3 Quarter-wavelength square loop (single-element quad).

Chap14_Carr

4/10/01

3:32 PM

Page 291

1 large loops 291


4


4

14-4 Bottom-fed loop.


4


4

X1 X2


3

14-5 Delta loop antenna.

3


3

X1 X2

Chap14_Carr

4/10/01

3:32 PM

Page 292

292 Large wire loop antennas
The feedpoint impedance of the 1 loop is around 100 Ω, so it provides a slight
mismatch to 75-Ω coax and a 2:1 mismatch to 52-Ω coax. A very good match to 52-Ω
coax can be produced using the scheme of Fig. 14-6. Here, a quarter-wavelength
coaxial cable matching section is made of 75-Ω coaxial cable. The length of this cable should be
246V
L feet  
FMHz

[14.3]

where
Lfeet is the length, in feet (ft)
V is the velocity factor of the coax
FMHz is the frequency, in megahertz (MHz)
The impedance Zo of the cable used for the matching section should be

Z
Zo  Z
L s

[14.4]

To X1 and X2


matching section
4
(75  coax)

 = 246V
4 FMHz

ft
14-6 Quarter-wavelength
coaxial matching section.

52 coax to
receiver (any length)

Chap14_Carr

4/10/01

3:32 PM

Page 293

Delta loop 293
where
Zo is the characteristic impedance of the coax used in the matching section, in
ohms
ZL is the feedpoint impedance of the antenna, in ohms
Zs is the source impedance (i.e., the 52-Ω characteristic impedance of the line to
the receiver in standard systems)
When Eq. 14.4 is applied to this system, where Zs  52 Ω, ZL  100 Ω:
0
0
)(
Ω5
2
)
Ω  72 Ω
Zo  (1

[14.5]

This is a very good match to 75-Ω coaxial cable.

Demiquad loop antenna
The demiquad is a single-element 1 quad antenna. The length of the antenna is,
like the cubical quad beam antenna (see Chap. 12), one wavelength. Figure 14-7
shows a type of demi-quad based on the tee-cross type of mast.
The impedance-matching section is a quarter-wavelength piece of 75-Ω coaxial
cable (RG-58/U or RF-11/U). The length of the matching section is determined from:
246V
L 
FMHz

[14.6]

where
L is the overall length, in feet
FMHz is the frequency, in megahertz
V is the velocity factor of the coaxial cable (typically 0.66, 0.70, or 0.80)

Delta loop
The delta loop antenna, like the Greek uppercase letter “delta” (∆) from which it
draws its name, is triangle-shaped (Fig. 14-8). The delta loop is a full wavelength,
with elements approximately 2 percent longer than the natural wavelength (like the
quad). The actual length will be a function of the proximity and nature of the underlying ground, so some experimentation is necessary. The approximate preadjustment lengths of the sides are found from:
437
L1   ft
FMHz

[14.7]

296
L2  L3  
FMHz

[14.8]

The delta loop antenna is fed from 52-Ω coaxial cable through a 4:1 balun transformer. The delta loop can be built in a fixed location, and will offer a bidirectional
pattern.

Chap14_Carr

4/10/01

3:32 PM

Page 294

294 Large wire loop antennas

Wire

Mast

Coax to
XMTR
(52 )

Matching
section
(75 )

14-7 Demiquad antenna.

Chap14_Carr

4/10/01

3:32 PM

Page 295

Half-delta sloper (HDS) 295
L1

L2

L3

L1 = 437 Feet
FMHz

4:1 BALUN

L2 = L3 = 296 Feet
FMHz

14-8 Delta loop antenna.

Half-delta sloper (HDS)
The half-delta sloper (HDS) antenna (Fig. 14-9) is similar to the full delta loop, except that (like the quarter-wavelength vertical) half of the antenna is in the form of
an “image” in the ground. Gains of 1.5 to 2 dB are achievable. The HDS antenna
consists of two elements: a /3-wavelength sloping wire and a /6 vertical wire (on
an insulated mast), or a /6 metal mast. Because the ground currents are very important, much like the vertical antenna, either an extensive radial system at both
ends is needed, or a base ground return wire (buried) must be provided.
The HDS will work on its design frequency, plus harmonics of the design
frequency. For a fundamental frequency of 5 MHz, a vertical segment of 33 ft and a
sloping section of 66 ft is needed. The lengths for any frequency are found from

328
 
3
FMHz

[14.9]

Chap14_Carr

4/10/01

3:32 PM

Page 296

296 Large wire loop antennas
and

164
 
6
FMHz

[14.10]

The HDS is fed at one corner, close to the ground. If only the fundamental
frequency is desired, then you can feed it with 52-Ω coaxial cable. But at harmonics, the feedpoint impedance changes to as high as 1000 Ω. If harmonic operation is intended, then an antenna tuning unit (ATU) is needed at point A to
match these impedances.

Bisquare loop antenna
The bisquare antenna, shown in Fig. 14-10, is similar to the other large loops, except that it is /2 on each side, making a total wire length of two wavelengths. This
antenna is built like the diamond loop shown earlier (i.e., it is a large square loop fed
at an apex that is set at the bottom of the assembly). In this case, the loop is fed either with an antenna tuning unit (to match a 1000-Ω impedance) or a quarter-wavelength matching section made of 300-Ω or 450-Ω twin-lead transmission line. A 1:1
balun transformer connects the 75-Ω coaxial cable to the matching section.
Good electrical
and mechanical
connection


3

6

Metal mast
or wire

Earth

A

Buried ground return wire (bare)

14-9 Half-delta loop antenna.

52 
Coax

Chap14_Carr

4/10/01

3:32 PM

Page 297

Bisquare loop antenna 297

Each side is /2
2
480
L side =
FMHz

}

/ Matching section
4

14-10 Bisquare 2 square loop
antenna.

4

1:1 BALUN
transformer

52  Coaxial
cable to receiver

The bisquare antenna offers as much as 4-dB gain broadside to the plane of the
antenna (i.e., in and out of the book page), in a figure-8 pattern, on the design frequency. It is horizontally polarized. When the frequency drops to one-half of the design frequency, the gain drops to about 2 dB, and the antenna works like the
diamond loop covered previously.

This page intentionally left blank

15

Chapter

Small loop
receiving antennas
Radio direction finders and people who listen to the AM broadcasting bands, VLF,
medium-wave, or the so-called low-frequency tropical bands are all candidates for a
small loop antenna. These antennas are fundamentally different from large loops and
other sorts of antennas used in these bands. Large loop antennas have a length of at
least 0.5␭, and most are quite a bit larger than 0.5␭. Small loop antennas, on the other
hand, have an overall length that is less than 0.22␭, with most being less than 0.10␭.
The small loop antenna responds to the magnetic field component of the electromagnetic wave instead of the electrical field component. One principal difference between the large loop and the small loop is found when examining the RF currents
induced in a loop when a signal intercepts it. In a large loop, the current will vary from
one point in the conductor to another, with voltage varying out of phase with the current. In the small loop antenna, the current is the same throughout the entire loop.
The differences between small loops and large loops show up in some interesting ways, but perhaps the most striking is the directions of maximum response—the
main lobes—and the directions of the nulls. Both types of loops produce figure-8
patterns but in directions at right angles with respect to each other. The large loop
antenna produces main lobes orthogonal, at right angles or “broadside,” to the plane
of the loop. Nulls are off the sides of the loop. The small loop, however, is exactly the
opposite: The main lobes are off the sides of the loop (in the direction of the loop
plane), and the nulls are broadside to the loop plane (Fig. 15-1A). Do not confuse
small loop behavior with the behavior of the loopstick antenna. Loopstick antennas
are made of coils of wire wound on a ferrite or powdered-iron rod. The direction of
maximum response for the loopstick antenna is broadside to the rod, with deep nulls
off the ends (Fig. 15-1B). Both loopsticks and small wire loops are used for radio direction-finding and for shortwave, low-frequency medium-wave, AM broadcast
band, and VLF listening.
The nulls of a loop antenna are very sharp and very deep. Small changes of pointing direction can make a profound difference in the response of the antenna. If you
point a loop antenna so that its null is aimed at a strong station, the signal strength of

Copyright 2001 - the McGraw-Hill Companies

299

Chap15_Carr

4/10/01

3:29 PM

Page 300

300 Small loop receiving antennas

15-1A Large loop antenna.

the station appears to drop dramatically at the center of the notch. Turn the antenna
only a few degrees one way or the other, however, and the signal strength increases
sharply. The depth of the null can reach 10 to 15 dB on sloppy loops and 30 to 40 dB
on well-built loops (30 dB is a very common value). I have seen claims of 60-dB nulls
for some commercially available loop antennas. The construction and uniformity of
the loop are primary factors in the sharpness and depth of the null.

Chap15_Carr

4/10/01

3:29 PM

Page 301

Small loop receiving antennas 301

15-1B Loopstick antenna.

At one time, the principal use of the small loop antenna was radio direction-finding, especially in the lower-frequency bands. The RDF loop is mounted with a compass rose to allow the operator to find the direction of minimum response. The null
was used, rather than the peak response point, because it is far narrower than the
peak. As a result, precise determination of direction is possible. Because the null
is bidirectional, ambiguity exists as to which of the two directions is the correct

Chap15_Carr

4/10/01

3:29 PM

Page 302

302 Small loop receiving antennas
direction. What the direction-finder “finds” is a line along which the station exists. If
the line is found from two reasonably separated locations and the lines of direction
are plotted on a map, then the two lines will cross in the area of the station. Three or
more lines of direction (a process called triangulation) yields a pretty precise
knowledge of the station’s actual location.
Today, these small loops are still used for radio direction-finding, but their use
has been extended into the general receiving arena, especially on the low frequencies. One of the characteristics of these bands is the possibility of strong local interference smothering weaker ground-wave and sky-wave stations. As a result, you
cannot hear cochannel signals when one of them is very strong and the other is
weak. Similarly, if a cochannel station has a signal strength that is an appreciable
fraction of the desired signal and is slightly different in frequency, then the two signals will heterodyne together and form a whistling sound in the receiver output. The
frequency of the whistle is an audio tone equal to the difference in frequency between the two signals. This is often the case when trying to hear foreign BCB signals
on frequencies (called split frequencies) between the standard spacing. The directional characteristics of the loop can help if the loop null is placed in the direction of
the undesired signal.
Loops are used mainly in the low-frequency bands even though such loops are
either physically larger than high-frequency loops or require more turns of wire.
Loops have been used as high as VHF and are commonly used in the 10-m ham band
for such activities as hidden transmitter hunts. The reason why low frequencies are
the general preserve of loops is that these frequencies are more likely to have substantial ground-wave signals. Sky-wave signals lose some of their apparent directivity because of multiple reflections. Similarly, VHF and UHF waves are likely to reflect
from buildings and hillsides and so will arrive at angles other than the direction of
the transmitter. As a result, the loop is less useful for the purpose of radio directionfinding. If your goal is not RDF but listening to the station, this is hardly a problem.
A small loop can be used in the upper shortwave bands to null a strong local groundwave station in order to hear a weaker sky-wave station. Finally, loops can be useful
in rejecting noise from local sources, such as a “leaky” electric power line or a neighbor’s outdoor light dimmer.
Let’s examine the basic theory of small loop antennas and then take a look at
some practical construction methods.

Grover’s equation
Grover’s equation (Grover, 1946) seems closer to the actual inductance measured in
empirical tests than certain other equations that are in use. This equation is



K2a N
LH  (K1 N 2a)  ln 
(N 1) b

K3


aN
K4 (N

where LH is the inductance, in microhenrys (H)
a is the length of a loop side, in centimeters (cm)
b is the loop width, in centimeters (cm)

1) b

Chap15_Carr

4/10/01

3:29 PM

Page 303

Air core frame loops (“box” loops) 303
n is the number of turns in the loop
K1 through K4 are shape constants and are given in Table 15-1
ln is the natural log of this portion of the equation

Air core frame loops (“box” loops)
A wire loop antenna is made by winding a large coil of wire, consisting of one or more
turns, on some sort of frame. The shape of the loop can be circular, square, triangular, hexagonal, or octagonal. For practical reasons, the square loop seems to be most
popular. With one exception, the loops considered in this section will be square, so
you can easily duplicate them.
The basic form of the simplest loop is shown in Fig. 15-2. This loop is square,
with sides the same length A all around. The width of the loop (B) is the distance
from the first turn to the last turn in the loop, or the diameter of the wire if only one
turn is used. The turns of the loop in Fig. 15-2 are depth wound, meaning that each
turn of the loop is spaced in a slightly different parallel plane. The turns are spaced
evenly across distance B. Alternatively, the loop can be wound such that the turns
are in the same plane (this is called planar winding). In either case, the sides of the
loop (A) should be not less than five times the width (B). There seems to be little difference between depth- and planar-wound loops. The far-field patterns of the different shape loops are nearly the same if the respective cross-sectional areas (r2 for
circular loops and A2 for square loops) are less than 2/100.
The reason why a small loop has a null when its broadest aspect is facing the signal is simple, even though it seems counterintuitive at first blush. Take a look at Fig.
15-3. Here, we have two identical small loop antennas at right angles to each other.
Antenna A is in line with the advancing radio wave, whereas antenna B is broadside
to the wave. Each line in the wave represents a line where the signal strength is the
same, i.e., an “isopotential line.” When the loop is in line with the signal (antenna A),
there is a difference of potential from one end of the loop to the other, so current can
be induced in the wires. When the loop is turned broadside, however, all points on
the loop are on the same potential line, so there is no difference of potential between
segments of the conductor. Thus little signal is picked up (and the antenna therefore
sees a null).
The actual voltage across the output terminals of an untuned loop is a function
of the angle of arrival of the signal  (Fig. 15-4), as well as the strength of the signal
and the design of the loop. The voltage Vo is given by

Table 15-1. Shape constants
Shape
Triangle
Square
Hexagon
Octagon

K1

K2

K3

K4

0.006
0.008
0.012
0.016

1.155
1.414
2.00
2.613

0.655
0.379
0.655
0.7514

0.135
0.33
0.135
0.0715

Chap15_Carr

4/10/01

3:29 PM

Page 304

304 Small loop receiving antennas

15-2A A simple loop antenna.

2ANEf cos ()
Vo  

where Vo is the output voltage of the loop
A is the area of the loop, in square meters (m2)
N is the number of turns of wire in the loop
Ef is the strength of the signal, in volts per meter (V/m)
a is the angle of arrival of the signal
 is the wavelength of the arriving signal
Loops are sometimes specified in terms of the effective height of the antenna.
This number is a theoretical construct that compares the output voltage of a small
loop with a vertical piece of the same kind of wire that has a height of
2NA
Heff  

If a capacitor (such as C1 in Fig. 15-2) is used to tune the loop, then the output
voltage Vo will rise substantially. The output voltage found using the first equation is
multiplied by the loaded Q of the tuned circuit, which can be from 50 to 100:
2ANEf Q cos ()
Vo  

Even though the output signal voltage of tuned loops is higher than that of untuned loops, it is nonetheless low compared with other forms of antenna. As a result,
a loop preamplifier usually is needed for best performance.

Chap15_Carr

4/10/01

3:29 PM

Page 305

Air core frame loops (“box” loops) 305

15-3 Two small loop antennas at right angles to each other.

15-4 An untuned loop antenna.

Chap15_Carr

4/10/01

3:29 PM

Page 306

306 Small loop receiving antennas

Transformer loops
It is common practice to make a small loop antenna with two loops rather than just
one. Figure 15-5 shows such a transformer loop antenna. The main loop is built exactly as discussed above: several turns of wire on a large frame, with a tuning capacitor to resonate it to the frequency of choice. The other loop is a one- or two-turn
coupling loop. This loop is installed in very close proximity to the main loop, usually
(but not necessarily) on the inside edge not more than a couple of centimeters away.
The purpose of this loop is to couple signal induced from the main loop to the receiver at a more reasonable impedance match.
The coupling loop is usually untuned, but in some designs a tuning capacitor
(C2) is placed in series with the coupling loop. Because there are many fewer turns
on the coupling loop than on the main loop, its inductance is considerably smaller. As
a result, the capacitance to resonate is usually much larger. In several loop antennas
constructed for purposes of researching this chapter, I found that a 15-turn main
loop resonated in the AM BCB with a standard 365-pF capacitor, but the two-turn

15-5 A transformer loop antenna.

Chap15_Carr

4/10/01

3:29 PM

Page 307

Tuning schemes for loop antennas 307
coupling loop required three sections of a ganged 3  365-pF capacitor connected in
parallel to resonate at the same frequencies.
In several experiments, I used computer ribbon cable to make the loop turns.
This type of cable consists of anywhere from 8 to 64 parallel insulated conductors
arranged in a flat ribbon shape. Properly interconnected, the conductors of the ribbon cable form a continuous loop. It is no problem to take the outermost one or two
conductors on one side of the wire array and use them for a coupling loop.

Tuning schemes for loop antennas
Loop performance is greatly enhanced by tuning the inductance of the loop to the
desired frequency. The bandwidth of the loop is reduced, which reduces front-end
overload. Tuning also increases the signal level available to the receiver by a factor
of 20 to 100 times. Although tuning can be a bother if the loop is installed remotely
from the receiver, the benefits are well worth it in most cases.
There are several different schemes available for tuning, and these are detailed
in Fig. 15-6. The parallel tuning scheme, which is by far the most popular, is shown
in Fig. 15-6A. In this type of circuit, the capacitor (C1) is connected in parallel with
the inductor, which in this case is the loop. Parallel resonant circuits have a very high
impedance to signals on their resonant frequency and a very low impedance to other
frequencies. As a result, the voltage level of resonant signals is very much larger than
the voltage level of off-frequency signals.
The series resonant scheme is shown in Fig. 15-6B. In this circuit, the loop is
connected in series with the capacitor. A property of series resonant circuits is that
they offer a high impedance to all frequencies except the resonant frequency (exactly the opposite of the case of parallel resonant circuits). As a result, current from
the signal will pass through the series resonant circuit at the resonant frequency, but
off-frequency signals are blocked by the high impedance.
There is a wide margin for error in the inductance of loop antennas, and even the
precise-looking equations to determine the required values of capacitance and inductance for proper tuning are actually only estimations. The exact geometry of the
loop “as built” determines the actual inductance in each particular case. As a result,
it is often the case that the tuning provided by the capacitor is not as exact as desired, so some form of compensation is needed. In some cases, the capacitance required for resonance is not easily available in a standard variable capacitor, and some
means must be provided for changing the capacitance. Figure 15-6C shows how this
is done. The main tuning capacitor can be connected in either series or parallel with
other capacitors to change the value. If the capacitors are connected in parallel, then
the total capacitance is increased (all capacitances are added together). If the extra
capacitor is connected in series, however, then the total capacitance is reduced. The
extra capacitors can be switched in and out of a circuit to change frequency bands.
Tuning of a remote loop can be a bother if it is done by hand, so some means
must be found to do it from the receiver location (unless you enjoy climbing into the
attic or onto the roof). Traditional means of tuning called for using a low-rpm dc motor, or stepper motor, to turn the tuning capacitor. A very popular combination was
the little 1- to 12-rpm motors used to drive rotating displays in retail store show

Chap15_Carr

4/10/01

3:30 PM

Page 308

308 Small loop receiving antennas

15-6 Various tuning schemes: (A) parallel, (B) series resonant, (C) series or parallel.

Chap15_Carr

4/10/01

3:30 PM

Page 309

Shielded loop antennas 309
windows. But this approach is not really needed today. We can use varactor voltagevariable capacitance diodes to tune the circuit.
A varactor works because the junction capacitance of the diode is a function of
the applied reverse-bias voltage. A high voltage (such as 30 V) drops the capacitance, whereas a low voltage increases it. Varactors are available with maximum capacitances of 22, 33, 60, 100, and 400 pF. The latter are of most interest to us
because they have the same range as the tuning capacitors normally used with loops.
Figure 15-7 shows how a remote tuning scheme can work with loop antennas.
The tuning capacitor is a combination of a varactor diode and two optional capacitors: a fixed capacitor (C1) and a trimmer (C2). The dc tuning voltage (Vt ) is provided from the receiver end from a fixed dc power supply (V ). A potentiometer
(R1) is used to set the voltage to the varactor, hence also to tune the loop. A dc blocking capacitor (C3) keeps the dc tuning voltage from being shorted out by the receiver
input circuitry.

The sports fan’s loop
OK, sports fans, what do you do when the best game of the week is broadcast only
on a low-powered AM station and you live at the outer edge of their service area
where the signal strength leaves much to be desired? You use the sports fan’s loop
antenna, that’s what! I first learned of this antenna from a friend of mine, a professional broadcast engineer, who worked at a religious radio station that had a pipsqueek signal but lots of fans. It really works—one might say it’s a miracle.
The basic idea is to build a 16-turn, 60-cm2 tuned loop and then place the AM
portable radio at the center so that its loopstick is aimed such that its null end is
broadside of the loop. When you do so, the nulls of both the loop and the loopstick
are in the same direction. The signal will be picked up by the loop and then coupled
to the radio’s loopstick antenna. Sixteen-conductor ribbon cable can be used for
making the loop. For an extra touch of class, place the antenna and radio assembly
on a dining room table lazy Susan to make rotation easier. A 365-pF tuning capacitor
is used to resonate the loop. If you listen to only one station, then this capacitor can
be a trimmer type.

Shielded loop antennas
The loop antennas discussed thus far in this chapter have all been unshielded types.
Unshielded loops work well under most circumstances, but in some cases their pattern is distorted by interaction with the ground and nearby structures (trees, buildings, etc.). In my own tests, trips to a nearby field proved necessary to measure the
depth of the null because of interaction with the aluminum siding on my house. Figure 15-8 shows two situations. In Fig. 15-8A we see the pattern of the normal “free
space” loop, i.e., a perfect figure-8 pattern. When the loop interacts with the nearby
environment, however, the pattern distorts. In Fig. 15-8B we see some filling of the
notch for a moderately distorted pattern. Some interactions are so severe that the
pattern is distorted beyond all recognition.

4/10/01

3:30 PM

Page 310

15-7 Remote tuning scheme.

Chap15_Carr

Chap15_Carr

4/10/01

3:30 PM

Page 311

Using a loop antenna 311

15-8A A normal “free space” loop.

15-8B Filling of the notch.

The solution to the problem is to reduce interaction by shielding the loop, as in
Fig. 15-9. Loop antennas operate on the magnetic component of the electromagnetic
wave, so the loop can be shielded against voltage signals and electrostatic interactions. In order to prevent harming the ability to pick up the magnetic field, a gap is
left in the shield at one point.
There are several ways to shield a loop. You can, for example, wrap the loop in
adhesive-backed copper-foil tape. Alternatively, you can wrap the loop in aluminum
foil and hold it together with tape. Another method is to insert the loop inside a copper or aluminum tubing frame. Or—the list seems endless.

Using a loop antenna
Most readers will use a loop for DXing rather than hidden transmitter hunting, navigation, or other RDF purposes. For the DXer, there are actually two uses for the

Chap15_Carr

4/10/01

3:30 PM

Page 312

312 Small loop receiving antennas

15-9 Shielding the loop.

loop. One is when you are a renter or live in a community that has routine covenants
against outdoor antennas. In this situation, the loop will serve as an active antenna
for receiving AM BCB and other low-frequency signals without the neighbors or
landlord becoming PFJs (“purple-faced jerks”).
The other use is illustrated by the case of a friend of mine. He regularly tunes in
clear channel WSM (650 kHz, Nashville) in the wee hours between Saturday evening
(“Grand Ole Opry” time) and dawn. However, this “clear” channel of WSM is not really so clear, especially without a narrow filter in the receiver. He uses a loop antenna
to null out a nearby 630-kHz signal that made listening a bit dicey and can now tape
his 1940s–1950s vintage country music.
It is not necessary to place the desired station directly in the main lobes off the
ends of the antenna but rather to place the nulls (broadside) in the direction of the

Chap15_Carr

4/10/01

3:30 PM

Page 313

Loop amplifier 313
offending station that you want to eliminate. So what happens if the offending station and the desired station are in a direct line with each other and your receiving location is in the middle between them? Both nulls and lobes on a loop antenna are
bidirectional, so a null on the offending station also will null the desired station in the
opposite direction.
One method is to use a sense antenna to spoil the pattern of the loop to a cardioid shape. Another method is to use a spoiler loop to null the undesired signal. The
spoiler loop is a large box loop placed 1 to 3 ft (found experimentally) behind the reception loop in the direction of the offending signal. This method was first described
by Levintow and is detailed in Fig. 15-10. The small loopstick may be the antenna inside the receiver, whereas the large loop is a box loop such as the sports fan’s loop.
The large box loop is placed about 33 to 100 cm behind the loopstick and in the direction of the offending station. The angle with respect to the line of centers should
be 60° to 90°, which also was found experimentally. It is also possible to use two air
core loops to produce an asymmetrical receiving pattern.

Sharpening the loop
Many years ago, the Q-multiplier was a popular add-on accessory for a communications receiver. These devices were sold as Heathkits, and many construction projects
could be found in magazines and amateur radio books. The Q-multiplier has the effect of seeming to greatly increase the sensitivity of a receiver, as well as greatly reducing the bandwidth of the front end. Thus it allows better reception of some
stations because of increased sensitivity and narrowed bandwidth.
A Q-multiplier is an active electronic circuit placed at the antenna input of a receiver. It is essentially an Armstrong oscillator, as shown in Fig. 15-11, that does not
quite oscillate. These circuits have a tuned circuit (L1/C1) at the input of an amplifier
stage and a feedback coupling loop (L3). The degree of feedback is controlled by the
coupling between L1 and L3. The coupling is varied by varying both how close the
two coils are and their relative orientation with respect to each other. Certain other
circuits use a series potentiometer in the L3 side that controls the amount of feedback.
The Q-multiplier is adjusted to the point that the circuit is just on the verge of
oscillating, but not quite. As the feedback is backed away from the threshold of oscillation, but not too far, the narrowing of bandwidth occurs, as does the increase in
sensitivity. It takes some skill to operate a Q-multiplier, but it is easy to use once you
get the hang of it and is a terrific accessory for any loop antenna.

Loop amplifier
Figure 15-12 shows the circuit for a practical loop amplifier that can be used with either shielded or unshielded loop antennas. It is based on junction field effect transistors (JFET) connected in cascade. The standard common-drain configuration is
used for each transistor, so the signals are taken from the source terminals. The
drain terminals are connected together and powered from the 12-V dc power

Chap15_Carr

4/10/01

3:30 PM

Page 314

15-10 Use of a spoiler loop to null an undesired signal.

314 Small loop receiving antennas

Chap15_Carr

4/10/01

3:30 PM

Page 315

Loop amplifier 315

15-11 A Q-multiplier.

supply. A 2.2-F bypass capacitor is used to put the drain terminals of Q1 and Q2 at
ground potential for ac signals while keeping the dc voltage from being shorted out.
The two output signals are applied to the primary of a center-tapped transformer, the center tap of which is grounded. To keep the dc on the source terminals
from being shorted through the transformer winding, a pair of blocking capacitors
(C4, C5) is used.
The input signals are applied to the gate terminals of Q1 and Q2 through dc
blocking capacitors C2 and C3. A pair of diodes (D1, D2) is used to keep high-amplitude noise transients from affecting the operation of the amplifier. These diodes are
connected back to back in order to snub out both polarities of signal.
Tuning capacitor C1 is used in lieu of the capacitor in the loop and is used to resonate the loop to a specific frequency. Its value can be found from the equation given
earlier.
The transistors used for the push-pull amplifier (Q1, Q2) can be nearly any general-purpose JFET device (MPF-102, MPF-104, etc.). A practical approach for many
people is to use transistors from service replacement lines, such as the NTE-312 and
NTE-316 devices.

Chap15_Carr

4/10/01

3:30 PM

Page 316

15-12 A practical loop amplifier.

316 Small loop receiving antennas

Chap15_Carr

4/10/01

3:30 PM

Page 317

Special problem for VLF/LF loops 317

Special problem for VLF/LF loops
A capacitance is formed whenever two conductors are side by side. A coil produces
capacitance as well as inductance because the turns are side by side. Unfortunately,
with large multiturn loops, this capacitance can be quite large. The “distributed capacitance” of the loop causes a self-resonance with the inductance. The loop does
not work well at frequencies above the self-resonant point, so it is sometimes important to raise the self-resonance to a point where it does not affect operation at the
desired frequencies.
Figure 15-13 shows a solution that raises the self-resonant point. The turns are
broken into two or more groups and separated by a space. This method reduces the
effective capacitance by placing the capacitances of each group of wires in series
with the others.

15-13 Raising the self-resonant point.

Chap15_Carr

4/10/01

3:30 PM

Page 318

318 Small loop receiving antennas

Coaxial-cable loop antennas
One of the more effective ways to make a shielded loop is to use coaxial cable. Figure 15-14 shows the circuit of such a loop. Although only a single-turn loop is shown,
there can be any number of turns. One reader made a 100-kHz LORAN (a navigation
system) loop using eight turns of RG-59/U coaxial cable on an 8-ft diameter.
Note the special way that the coaxial cable is connected. This method is called
the Faraday connection after the fact that the shield of the coax forms a Faraday
shield. At the output end, the center conductor of the coaxial cable is connected to
the center conductor of the coaxial connector. The coax shield is connected to the
connector ground/shield terminal. At the other end of the loop, the shield is left
floating, but the center conductor is connected to the shield. Note very carefully that
the center conductor at the far end is connected to the shield at the connector, not
at just any convenient point.

15-14 A coaxial-cable shielded loop.

16

Chapter

Small transmitting
loop antennas
Small transmitting loops are those which are less than one-third wavelength (␭/3)
according to Hart (1986) or between 0.04␭ and 0.10␭ according to Belrose (1993).
Other sources claim that loops up to about 0.20␭ are small. The key characteristic is
that the current is equal in all points of the loop rather than varying with loop length
the way the current in a large loop (or other antenna) does.
One of the parameters of the small loop antenna is a very low radiation resistance (it is a function of the area of the loop). The radiation resistance of the small
loop antenna is less than 1 ⍀ and often considerably less than this figure (e.g., 0.05
⍀). This means that the copper or aluminum losses of the antenna must be kept
very, very low. For such reasons, it is common to assemble the small transmitting
loop antenna from 1- to 4-in copper or aluminum pipe. For this reason, the square
(Fig. 16-1A) or octagon (Fig. 16-1B) shapes are preferred. The reason this is true is
purely mechanical: The square loop can be built with 90° elbow joints, and the octagon can be built with 45° elbow joints. For antennas whose circumference is greater
than ␭/8, standard 3/4-in copper pipe can be used in construction, but for smallersized loops, larger-sized copper piping is used.
The small transmitting loop tends to be highly inductive in its reactance. Values
of inductive reactance to 1000 ⍀ are not unusual, although closer to 100 ⍀ is the
norm. Because of this inductive reactance, the small transmitting loop antenna is
tuned by one or more series capacitors.
A sample loop was modeled by Belrose (1993). It was 1 m in diameter and was
made of 2.54-cm (1-in) copper pipe. For this loop, the gains were
10 MHz
14 MHz
21 MHz
30 MHz

2.88 dBi
0.22 dBi
1.14 dBi
1.42 dBi

Note that the gains were all less than that of a dipole (12.15 dBi) but in the upper regions of the frequency spectrum were quite decent. Even at 10 MHz, the 1-m

Copyright 2001 - the McGraw-Hill Companies

319

Chap16_Carr

4/10/01

3:48 PM

Page 320

320 Small transmitting loop antennas

16-1 Small transmitting loop antennas: (A) square, (B) octagon.

small loop antenna was only 5.03 dBi less than the dipole. The loop probably would
show similar gains up to the point of self-resonance.
Calculations of the current and voltage within the loop are substantial. The loop
impedance at 10 MHz is 0.088 1 j161 . This means that a 150-W transmitter, certainly modest for these frequencies, would produce 41 A circulating inside the loop
and a voltage across the tuning capacitor of 6600 V. As Belrose (1993) warns: “Don’t
touch your loop when transmitting!”
The tuning capacitor in Belrose’s loop should be rated for at least 10,000 V to
guard against anyone using more than 150 W. Keep in mind that a power of 500 W will
produce potentials across the capacitor of 30,000 V, so you will need a capacitor with
at least 1/2-in spacing. A 1-in spacing is good for about 75,000 V. It is probably best to
use a vacuum-variable capacitor for the tuning capacitor of a small loop antenna if you
can afford one. Regardless, the loop power should be kept under control!
The Q of the antenna at any given resonant frequency is very, very high. For the
1-m loop antenna described earlier, the Q at 10 MHz was 1824, which resulted in a
bandwidth of 5.5 kHz (although in practice it is twice this amount before VSWR tol-

Chap16_Carr

4/10/01

3:48 PM

Page 321

Design equations 321
erances on the transmitter are exceeded). Regardless, the bandwidth of the
resonated loop is tiny, so some means must be provided for retuning the loop as
you shift frequency. If you do not shift frequency, then the loop can be tuned and
forgotten, but for the rest of the radio fraternity, perhaps a remotely tuned capacitor
is in order. Getting a large capacity variable in the voltages that are required for operation with a good power level is a bit tricky.

Design equations
The design equations developed by Hart (1986) are as follows:
Radiation resistance (RR):
RR  3.38  108 (F 2A)2

[16.1]

9.96  104S F

RL  
D

[16.2]

RR
!
RR RL

[16.3]

96S
L  1.9  108S (7.353 log10   6.386)
D

[16.4]

Loss resistance (RL):

Efficiency (!):

Inductance (L):

Inductive reactance (XL):
XL  2FL  106

[16.5]

1
C  
2FXL  106

[16.6]

F
XL
Q    
F
2 (RR RL)

[16.7]

F
F
Q

[16.8]

CD  0.82S

[16.9]

VC  PX

Q
L

[16.10]

Tuning capacitance (C):

Quality factor (Q):

Bandwidth ( F):

Distributed capacitance (CD):

Capacitor voltage (VC):

Chap16_Carr

4/10/01

3:48 PM

Page 322

322 Small transmitting loop antennas
where
A is the area of the loop, in square feet (ft2)
S is the length of the loop conductor, in feet (ft)
D is the diameter of the conductor, in inches (in)
P is the applied transmitter output power, in watts (W)

Some sample loop antennas
The Patterson (1967) loop antenna is shown in Fig. 16-2. It is made from 1.5-in copper tubing. Segments are cut and are joined together by eight 45° elbow joints, giving the octagon shape. Each segment is 0.5 ft long. The tuning is accomplished by
three capacitors, two of which are a split-stator unit (two capacitors on the same
shaft). The tuning control is the split-stator capacitor, whereas the loading control is
a single capacitor.

16-2 A Patterson loop antenna.

Chap16_Carr

4/10/01

3:48 PM

Page 323

Some sample loop antennas 323
Another loop antenna is shown in Fig. 16-3. This antenna has a Faraday feed system rather than a capacitor-coupled feed system, as did the Patterson loop. The tuning is accomplished by CA , the series tuning capacitor. The requirement must be met
that D1/D2  5.
Still another loop is shown in Fig. 16-4. This loop relies on magnetic coupling to
perform the coupling of the transmitter. In this loop antenna, the coupling is via a
small coupling loop and 50- coaxial cable to the transmitter. Capacitor C1 is used to
resonate the loop, whereas capacitors C2 and C3 serve the purposes of loading and
resonating the coupling loop. According to Mozzochi (1993), the voltages and currents with respect to the capacitors are
VC1  1800 P


[16.11]

VC2  18 P


[16.12]

VC3  17 P


[16.13]


IC1  2.2 P

[16.14]


IC2  0.21 P

[16.15]

16-3 A loop antenna with a Faraday feed system.

Chap16_Carr

4/10/01

3:48 PM

Page 324

324 Small transmitting loop antennas

16-4 A loop antenna with magnetic coupling.

IC3  0.15 P


[16.16]

The radiation patterns for the loop antenna are shown in Fig. 16-5. Note that
four elevations are given (0°, 20°, 45°, and 60°).
The bottom line is that small transmitting loop antennas are not very good for
those who can afford to put up a better antenna, but for those whose tight quarters
permit only a small transmitting loop, they are quite viable.

References
Belrose, John S. (1993), “An Update on Compact Transmitting Loops,” QST,
November.
Erwin, David (1991), “Very Small Transmitting and Receiving Only Antennas,” in HF
Antenna Collection, Radio Society of Great Britain, Potters Bar, Herts., UK,
Chap. 5.
Grover, F. W. (1946), Inductance Calculation-Working Formulas and Tables, Van
Nostrand, New York.
Hart, Ted (1986), “Small, High-Efficiency Loop Antennas: An Alternative Antenna
for Small Spaces,” QST, June.
Koontz, Floyd (1993), “A High-Directivity Receiving Antenna for 3.8 MHz,” QST, August, pp. 31–34.
McCoy, L. (1968), “The Army Loop in Ham Communications,” QST, March, pp.
17–18, 150; see also “Technical Correspondence” column, QST, May, pp. 49–51,
and November, pp. 46–47.

Chap16_Carr

4/10/01

3:48 PM

Page 325

References 325

16-5 Radiation patterns.

Mozzochi, Charles J. (1993), “A Small Loop Antenna for 160 Meters,” QST, pp.
32–34.
Orr, William (1994), “Feedback on Hart’s article,” QST, July.
Patterson, K. (1967), “Down-to-Earth Army Antennas,” Electronics, August 21, pp.
111–114.
Somerfield, A. (1952), Electrodynamics, Academic Press, New York.

This page intentionally left blank

17

CHAPTER

Antenna modeling
software
One of the significant contributions of computer technology to antenna design is the
improvement of modeling and simulation. Modeling and simulation are used in a
wide variety of applications, including management, science, and engineering. We
can now model just about any process, any device, or any circuit that can be reduced
mathematically. The purpose of modeling, at least in engineering, is to do the design
cheaply on the computer before “bending metal.” The old “cut and try” method
works, to be sure, but it is costly in time and money (two things perpetually in short
supply). If performance issues and problems can be solved on a computer, then we
are time and money ahead of the game. Also, modeling and simulation make it possible to look at more alternatives and to gauge the effect of a change in an antenna
design before the change is made.
Modeling is used not just in engineering but also in other processes. Organizations and management consultants use modeling and simulation to study their operations and find the most efficient way of doing things. I saw an example where an
inefficient truck terminal and warehouse operation was improved significantly by
modeling on a Windows desktop computer. The operators modeled the existing system and several alternative systems, and found that one particular rule (involving
bulk deliver trucks such as tankers and dry bulk carriers) was jamming up the normal package deliveries at the warehouse dock. They could have tried different sets
of rules over a couple of years, collected lots of data, presented scores of viewgraphs
to management committees, and still have overlooked the actual cause of the problem. The model showed the problem in only a few minutes, however.

What is a model?
Models are no big mystery. If you have fingers and can count, then you can make
models. In fact, you probably do make models mentally, e.g., when you look at how
much cash you have in your pocket when confronted with several different purchase
choices but cannot afford all of them. The “model” is the “what if” considerations
that lead to your selection.
Copyright 2001 - the McGraw-Hill Companies

327

Chap17_Carr

4/10/01

3:46 PM

Page 328

328 Antenna modeling software
Youngsters in the schools are learning that the equations and formulas they
learn in algebra and trigonometry are “models.” This designation was not used when
I was in school, but it is an apt description in most cases.
One of the earliest modeling methods for the masses was the computer-based
spreadsheet program. Software such as Microsoft Excel can be used to test various
scenarios by entering different values into the cells. I have seen spreadsheets used
for the originally intended business applications, as well as engineering applications
(including antenna design).
Antenna modeling software tends to use the “method of moments,” in which
each wire in the system is broken into 1 to N segments, and the current in each segment is calculated.

Some common programs
Some years ago an antenna modeling program came on the scene. Developed by the
Navy, this program used numerical methods to perform the complex calculations
needed to model an antenna. Called the Numerical Electromagnetic Computation
(NEC) program, a smaller version soon became available known as miniNEC (which
runs on PCs). You can download miniNEC-3 from several sources in the amateur radio newsgroups in the United States or United Kingdom, or from the Navy Postgraduate School Web site. A miniNEC-4 version is also available, but I understand that it
requires a license to use and cannot be exported without a permit from the U.S. government.
There are also a number of private vendors who offer the miniNEC at a price.
Some of the better vendors offer their own versions, based on the miniNEC concept,
but with some value added to make it worthwhile to buy theirs instead of using the
“freebie” version.
The miniNEC programs model wire antennas using the coordinate system
shown in Fig. 17-1. This is a standard three-dimensional Cartesian coordinate system in which the y axis is horizontal, the z axis is vertical, and the x axis is orthogonal to both the y and z axes. The idea is to specify the starting and ending points of
the wires making up the antenna in terms of the xyz coordinate system. Figure 17-2
shows a single-wire antenna laid out in the x axis. This axis is in the horizontal plane
but orthogonal to the y axis. The antenna designer will specify X1 and X2, which are
the starting and ending points of the wire.
The antenna can consist of a large number of wires, although the larger the number, the longer is the processing time. Each wire is broken into a number of different
segments for calculation purposes.

NEC-4
The NEC-4 software is the latest in the NEC series and is proprietary to the University of California, from whom a license must be obtained to use it. Because of national defense considerations, an export license is required to take NEC-4 overseas.
The NEC-4 software will produce modeling of underground radials, elements of
varying diameter, and carefully constructed close-spaced parallel wires.

Chap17_Carr

4/10/01

3:46 PM

Page 329

Some common programs 329

17-1 XYZ coordinate system for NecWin modeling software.

EZNEC Professional
Roy Lewallen, W7EL, provides the EZNEC Pro software. This software has an option
for NEC-4, provided that the license is obtained from the University of California
(again, export restrictions apply).

GNEC
Nittany-Scientific makes a version of NEC-4 known as GNEC. It permits the use of
catenary wires, helices, networks, and other possibilities. Outputs include 3-D, polar
plots, and rectangular plot graphs, as well as a large array of tabular reports.

Chap17_Carr

4/10/01

3:46 PM

Page 330

330 Antenna modeling software

17-2 Example of a single wire laid out on XYZ coordinate system.

NEC-2
This is a high-capability version of the NEC software, and it is in the public domain.
It is limited to antenna elements of constant diameter, although some software
providers who base their wares on NEC-2 provide corrections for multidiameters. It
is fitted with the Sommerfield-Norton ground model for modeling horizontal wires
close to the earth’s surface.

NECWin Plus
This software is provided by Nittany-Scientific. It features true spreadsheet geometry. The software also offers stepped-diameter corrections, a gain-averaging test, a

Chap17_Carr

4/10/01

3:46 PM

Page 331

Some common programs 331
CAD file (*.dxf), 2-D and 3-D plots, 2-D and 3-D antenna views, and certain graphic
outputs. There are two versions, NECWin Pro and NECWin Basic (NECWin Basic is
reviewed in this chapter).

EZNEC for Windows
Roy Lewallen’s EZNEC for Windows is available in both NEC-2 and NEC-4 versions,
although the NEC-4 version requires a license from the University of California to
operate. It offers 2-D and 3-D plots, 3-D plots with 2-D slicing, ground-wave output,
stepped-diameter correction, and various shortcuts to antenna modeling. The standard EZNEC is limited to 500 segments (the Pro version handles a much larger number of segments).

Expert MiniNEC
This new version of MiniNEC can handle sharp angles in antenna geometry directly
and handles antennas close to the ground much more accurately than MiniNEC. Several versions of Expert MiniNEC are available from EM Scientific. These are
MiniNEC for Windows and MiniNEC Broadcast Professional.

MiniNEC
MiniNEC Version 3.13 is the latest of the public-domain MiniNEC code. It runs on a
PC in the DOS mode. It handles element lengths of changing diameter. Horizontal
antennas must be at least 0.2 above ground for accurate results to occur.

NEC4Win95
Orion (Canada) offers a Windows 95/98 version of MiniNEC known as NEC4Win95.
It offers spreadsheet antenna geometry input, pull-down boxes for all other antenna
parameters, and a pattern-plotting routine that includes lobe identification and
bandwidth.

NECWin Basic
Many amateur and professional users have been increasingly dissatisfied with the
commercial miniNEC-based antenna modeling programs on the market (mostly because they only run in the DOS environment and are clumsy to use). A low-cost Windows-based modeling program is NecWin Basic for Windows. This program appears
to be a DOS-based NEC engine run with a Windows graphic user interface written in
Visual Basic 3.0. The vendor offering NecWin Basic for Windows is Nittany Scientific,
Inc. [Airline Highway, Suite 361, Hollister, CA, 95023-5621; phone: (408) 634-0573;
Web site: www.nittany-scientific.com]. The basic version (which I test drove and
now use) costs less than $100, and there is a professional version for a higher price.
NecWin Basic for Windows allows you to specify the geometry of the antenna in
the xyz coordinate system. This process is made a lot easier by the fact that it uses
a “spreadsheet-like” grid (Fig. 17-3). Once the geometry is entered, you can select
from several different ground situations (including “none” for free-space calculations), the operating frequency, and units of measure used for the antenna wires
(meters is default). You also can customize the calculations using the “Output” button. Once the geometry and parameters are entered, you can visualize the geometry
in “stick form” using the “Eye” button on the toolbar. The “Traffic Light” button

Chap17_Carr

4/10/01

3:46 PM

Page 332

332 Antenna modeling software
performs the NEC calculations, whereas the “Polar Coordinates” button creates the
elevation and azimuth pattern graphics. When you “Save Screen” in the “File” menu,
you will produce a bitmap (*.bmp) file of the pattern.
The particular geometry entered in Fig. 17-3 is for a long-wire antenna (Fig.
17-4) that is two wavelengths long and has a quarter-wavelength radial used as a
counterpoise ground. There are no wires in the y and z planes, so the values of Y1,
Y2, Z1, and Z2 are zero. The antenna is described with the coordinates X1  0.000 and
X2  14.56 m. The operating frequency is set to 25-MHz on another screen. When
the NEC calculations are made and the patterns displayed, the azimuth (Fig. 17-5)
and elevation (Fig. 17-6) patterns can be printed out.

17-3 NecWin screen.

17-4 Off-center fed doublet antenna.

Chap17_Carr

4/10/01

3:46 PM

Page 333

Some common programs 333

17-5 Modeled horizontal pattern.

NecWin Basic for Windows also will print out a data table of the frequency, wavelength, and VSWR. You can set the starting frequency, number of calculations, and
step frequency.
If there is any criticism of the NecWin Basic for Windows program, it is that it
does not graph the VSWR versus frequency curve. This is a little harder in Visual Basic 3.0 than in later versions, but users who also have Microsoft Excel on their computers can hand enter the numbers from the NecWin Basic for Windows output
report and get a chart similar to Fig. 17-7.
The low price of NecWin Basic for Windows makes it useful to amateur radio operators, shortwave and scanner enthusiasts, and other amateur antenna builders. If

Chap17_Carr

4/10/01

3:46 PM

Page 334

334 Antenna modeling software

17-6 Modeled vertical pattern.

you are serious about antennas, then you need to obtain this software. It will perform
well for many professional users, as well as student users in schools. However, professional users might want to consider buying the higher-priced NecWin Professional
for Windows version.

EZNEC for Windows
Roy Lewallen, W7EL, produces the EZNEC for Windows software. The software extends Roy’s earlier work on DOS versions of EZNEC but is still based on the NEC-2
engine (a NEC-4 professional version is available for those with the required license
from the University of California).
Figure 17-8 shows the basic window that opens when you open an antenna project (in this case, a 10-MHz dipole). Given in the active window are file name, frequency, wavelength (in meters), number of wires and segments, number of sources,
number of loads, transmission lines, ground type, wire loss, the units being calculated

Chap17_Carr

4/10/01

3:46 PM

Page 335

17-7 VSWR curve of the modeled antenna.

17-8 Basic window of EZNEC for Windows.

Chap17_Carr

4/10/01

3:46 PM

Page 336

336 Antenna modeling software
(meters, feet, etc.), plot type (azimuth, elevation), elevation angle, step size, a reference level, and an alternate SWR Zo.
There are command buttons to the left of the main window. These include Open,
Save As, Currents, Sto Dat, Load Dat, FF Tab, NF Tab, SWR, View Antenna, and FF
Plot. The “View Antenna” button provides a view of the xyz coordinate system along
with the wires (Fig. 17-9). The “FF Plot” button plots the far field of the antenna,
and the “SWR” button plots the SWR curve based on parameters you give it (starting
frequency, stopping frequency, frequency step).
The “View Antenna” window is shown in Fig. 17-9. This antenna view provides
the xyz coordinate system, along with the wires. There are scroll bars to the left of
the main window where the antenna appears that are used to vary the image
to better see it. A series of three “Reset” buttons resets the image to the initial
setting.
If you wish to plot the radiation pattern (azimuth or elevation) of the antenna,
then press “FF Plot” in the main window. The result will be as shown in Fig. 17-10.
Some data appears in the lower window on the plot. The data in this case are elevation angle, outer ring gain, slice gain maximum, front-to-side ratio, beamwidth, side-

17-9 View Antenna window of EZNEC for Windows.

Chap17_Carr

4/10/01

3:46 PM

Page 337

References 337

17-10 Result of pressing “FF Plot” button in main window of EZNEC for Windows.

lobe gain, front/sidelobe, cursor azimuth, and gain. You can print out the plot of the
radiation pattern with either the data present or the data hidden.
One of the really nice things about EZNEC for Windows is the availability of
VSWR plots without going to the professional edition. Figure 17-11 shows the plot
for the dipole under consideration. Note that the data given include the starting frequency, the SWR at the starting frequency, the impedance at the starting frequency,
the reflection coefficient at the starting frequency, and the source impedance.

References
Burke, G. J., and A. J. Poggio, “Numerical Electromagnetics Code (NEC)—Method
of Moments,” Naval Ocean Systems Center Technical Document 116, January
1981.
King, R. W. P., Tables of Antenna Characteristics, IFI/Plenum Data Corporation,
New York, 1971.
Prasad, S., and R. W. P. King, “Experimental Study of L-, T- and Related Transmission
Line Antennas,” Journal of Research of the National Bureau of Standards—
D Radio Propagation, Vol. 65D(5): 1961.

Chap17_Carr

4/10/01

3:46 PM

Page 338

338 Antenna modeling software

17-11 VSWR plot of a dipole with EZNEC for Windows.

Rockway, J. W., and J. C. Logan, MiniNEC Professional for Windows, EM Scientific,
Inc., Carson City, NV, 1995.
Rockway, J. W., and J. C. Logan, MiniNEC Broadcast Professional for Windows, EM
Scientific, Inc., Carson City, NV, 1996.
Rockway, J. W., and J. C. Logan, “Advances in MiniNEC,” IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine, 37(4): 1995.

18

CHAPTER

VHF/UHF transmitting
and receiving antennas
THE VHF/UHF SPECTRUM IS COMMONLY ACCEPTED TO RANGE FROM 30 MHZ TO 900 MHZ,
although the upper breakpoint is open to some differences of opinion. The VHF
spectrum is 30 MHz to 300 MHz, and the UHF spectrum is 300 MHz to 900 MHz.
Above 900 MHz is the microwave spectrum. These bands are used principally for
local “line-of-sight” communications, according to the standard wisdom. However,
with the advent of OSCAR satellites, the possibility of long-distance direct communications is a reality for VHF/UHF operators. In addition, packet radio is becoming
common; this means indirect long-distance possibilities through networking. For the
low end of the VHF spectrum (e.g., 6-m amateur band), long-distance communications are a relatively common occurrence.
In many respects, the low-VHF region is much like the 10-m amateur band and
11-m Citizens Band: skip is not an infrequent occurrence. Many years ago, I recall an
event where such skip caused many a local police officer to skip a heart beat. In those
days, our police department operated on 38.17 MHz, which is between the 6-m and
10-m amateur bands. They received an emergency broadcast concerning a bank robbery at a certain Wilson Boulevard address. After a race to the county line, they discovered that the reported address would be outside of the county, and in fact did not
exist even in the neighboring county (a number was skipped). The problem was
traced to a police department in a southwest city that also had a Wilson Boulevard,
and for them the alarm was real.
The principal difference between the lower frequencies and the VHF/UHF spectrum is that the wavelengths are shorter in the VHF/UHF region. Consider the fact
that the wavelengths for these bands range from 10 m to 1 m for the VHF region, and
from 1 m to 33 cm for the UHF region. Most antenna designs are based on wavelength,
so that fact has some implications for VHF/UHF antenna design. For example, because bandwidth is a function of length/diameter ratio for many classes of antenna,
broadbanding an antenna in the VHF/UHF region is relatively easy. If, say, 25-mm
(i.e., 1-in) aluminum tubing is used to make a quarter-wavelength vertical, then the
approximate L/D ratio is 790 in the 8-m band and 20 in the 2-m band. This feature is
fortunate, because the VHF/UHF bands tend to be wider than the HF bands.
Copyright 2001 - the McGraw-Hill Companies

339

Chap18_Carr

4/10/01

3:44 PM

Page 340

340 VHF/UHF transmitting and receiving antennas
Another point to make is that many of the mechanical chores of antenna design
and construction become easier for VHF/UHF antennas. One good example is the
delta impedance-matching scheme. At 80 m, the delta-match dimensions are approximately 36  43 ft, and at 2 m they are 9.5  12 inches. Clearly, delta matching
is a bit more practical for most users at VHF than at HF.

Types of antennas usable for VHF/UHF
The concept “VHF/UHF antenna” is only partially valid because virtually all forms
of antenna can be used at HF, MW, and VHF/UHF. The main limitations that distinguish supposedly VHF/UHF designs from others are mechanical: there are some
things that are simply much easier to accomplish with small antennas. Besides the
delta match mentioned previously, there is the ease of construction for multielement antennas. A 14-element 20-m beam would be a wonderful thing to have in a
QRM-laden DX pile-up, but is simply too impractical for all but a few users because
of its size. If you look on embassy rooftops around the world you will see manyelement Yagi and log periodic HF antennas supported on massive towers…and
some of them use a standard Size 25 tower (common for amateur use) as the
antenna boom! A 14-element 80/75-m Yagi approaches impossibility. But at 2 m, a
14-element Yagi beam antenna can be carried by one person, in one hand, unless
the wind is acting up.
Safety note Large array beams, even at VHF/UHF, have a relatively high
“windsail area,” and even relatively modest winds can apply a lot of force to them. I
once witnessed a large, strong technician blown off a ladder by wind acting on a modest, “suburban” sized, TV antenna. It can happen to you, too. So always install antennas with a helper, and use hoists and other tools to actually handle the array.

Lower band antennas on VHF/UHF
Between 1958 and 1962, a friend and I had access to a radio club amateur radio station in a Red Cross chapter house in Virginia. The “antenna farm” consisted of a 14element 2-m beam, a three-element triband HF beam (10, 15, and 20 m), and a
five-band (80 to 10 m) trap dipole. All of the coaxial cables came into the station
through a wall; they were kept disconnected and shorted out when not in use because of the senior Red Cross official’s concern over lightning.
One night, attempting to connect the 2-m beam to the Gonset “gooney box” 2-m
AM transceiver, my friend accidentally used the cable from the five-band trap dipole instead. We worked a lot of stations that contest weekend, and scored lots of points. Later,
we discovered the error, and asked a more technically competent adult (we were
teenagers), “Why the good reports?” He then gave us a lesson in longwire antenna theory. A good longwire is many wavelengths long. Consider that a half-wave antenna on 2
m is 80 m/2 m or 40 wavelengths shorter than an 80-m half-wave antenna. Thus, the
80-m antenna, counting foreshortening of physical lengths because of the traps, was on
the order of 35 to 38 wavelengths long on 2 m. We had a highly directional, but multilobed, pattern.

Chap18_Carr

4/10/01

3:44 PM

Page 341

VHF/UHF antenna impedance matching 341
Similarly, 40- to 10-m and 80- to 10-m trap verticals are often usable on
VHF/UHF frequencies without any adjustments. Similarly, Citizens Band 11-m antennas, many of which are 5⁄8-wavelength (18 ft high), will sometimes work on VHF
frequencies. Check the VSWR of an HF antenna on 2 m with a reliable VHF/UHF
VSWR meter (or RF wattmeter) to discover the truth about any particular antenna.
Always use the low-power setting on the transmitter to limit damage in cases where
the specific antenna is not usable on a specific frequency.
The lesson to be learned is that antennas are often usable on frequencies much
higher than the design frequency, even though useless on nearby bands. Care must be
exercised when initially checking out the antenna, but that is not an inordinate difficulty.

VHF/UHF antenna impedance matching
The VHF/UHF antenna is no more or less immune from the need for impedance matching than lower-frequency antennas. However, some methods are easier (coax baluns,
delta match, etc.) and others become either difficult or impossible. An example of the
latter case is the tuned LC impedance-matching network. At 6 m, and even to some
limited extent 2 m, inductor and capacitor LC networks can be used. But above 2 m
other methods are more reasonable. We can, however, mimic the LC tuner by using
stripline components, but that approach is not always suited to amateur needs.
The balun transformer makes an impedance transformation between balanced
and unbalanced impedances. Although both 1:1 and 4:1 impedance ratios are possible, the 4:1 ratio is most commonly used for VHF/UHF antenna work. At lower frequencies it is easy to build broadband transformer baluns, but these become more of
a problem at VHF and above.
For the VHF/UHF frequencies, a 4:1 impedance ratio coaxial balun (Fig. 18-1A)
is normally used. Two sections of identical coaxial cable are needed. One section (A)
has a convenient length to reach between the antenna and the transmitter. Its characteristic impedance is Zo. The other section (B) is a half-wavelength long at the
center of the frequency range of interest. The physical length is found from
5904 V
L=
FMHz

[18.1]

where
L is the cable length, in inches
FMHz is the operating frequency, in megahertz
V is the velocity factor of the coaxial cable
The velocity factors of common coaxial cables are shown in the following table.
Coaxial cable velocity factors
Regular polyethylene
Polyethylene foam
Teflon

0.66
0.80
0.72

Chap18_Carr

4/10/01

3:44 PM

Page 342

342 VHF/UHF transmitting and receiving antennas
4Z0

A

B

L

5904 V
Inches
FMHz

Zo
18-1A Coaxial 4:1 balun transformer.

Example 18-1 Calculate the physical length required of a 146-MHz 4:1 balun
made of polyethylene foam coaxial cable.
Solution:
5904 V
L
FMHz

Chap18_Carr

4/10/01

3:44 PM

Page 343

VHF/UHF antenna impedance matching 343
(5904) (0.80)
= 
146 MHz
4723.2
=  = 32.4 in
146 MHz
A mechanical method of joining the coaxial cables is shown in Fig. 18-1B. In this
example, three SO-239 coaxial receptacles are mounted on a metal plate. This arrangement has the effect of shorting together the shields of the three ends of coaxial cable.
The center conductors are connected in the manner shown. This method is used especially where a mounting bracket is available on the antenna. The lengths of coaxial
cable need PL-259 coax connectors installed in order to use this method.
The “delta match” gets its name from the fact that the structure of the matching
element has the shape of the Greek letter delta, or a triangle. Figure 18-2A shows the
basic delta match scheme. The matching element is attached to the driven element
of the antenna (symmetrically, about the center point of the antenna). The width
(A) of the delta match is given by
1416
L =  in
[18.2]
FMHz
While the height of the match (B) is
1776
L =  in
[18.3]
FMHz
The transmission line feeding the delta match is balanced line, such as parallel transmission line or twin lead. The exact impedance is not terribly critical because the dimensions (especially A) can be adjusted to accommodate differences. In general, however,
either 450- or 600-Ω line is used, although 300-Ω line can also be used. Figure 18-2B
Cable ends or
solder lugs

Solder
Solder

Mounting
plate
SO-239
connectors
18-1B Practical implementation of 4:1 balun using connectors.

Chap18_Carr

4/10/01

3:44 PM

Page 344

344 VHF/UHF transmitting and receiving antennas

L
A

line

B

D
Center

D

600- line

Delta match

L

468
FMHz

A

118
 2D
FMHz

B

148
FMHz

18-2A Delta feed matching system.

Center

Driven
element
Metal
rods

BALUN

18-2B Practical VHF delta match.

Chap18_Carr

4/10/01

3:44 PM

Page 345

VHF/UHF antenna impedance matching 345
shows a method for using coaxial cable with the delta match. The impedance is transformed in a 4:1 balun transformer (see Fig. 18-1A). The elements of the delta match can
be made from brass, copper, or aluminum tubing, or a bronze brazing rod bolted to the
main radiator element.
A stub-matching system is shown in Fig. 18-3. In this case, the impedance transformation is accomplished despite the half-wavelength shorted stub of transmission
line. The exact impedance of the line is not very critical, and is found from
2S
Zo  276 log10 
d

[18.4]

The matching stub section is made from metal elements such as tubing, wire, or
rods (all three are practical at VHF/UHF frequencies). For a 3⁄16-in rod, the spacing
is approximately 2.56 in to make a 450-Ω transmission line. A sliding short circuit is
used to set the electrical length of the half-wave stub. The stub is tapped at a distance

Radiator
element
Matching
stub

BA

LU

N

Coax

Sliding
short

Zo  276 Log

18-3 Stub matching.

2S
d

Chap18_Carr

4/10/01

3:44 PM

Page 346

346 VHF/UHF transmitting and receiving antennas
from the antenna feedpoint that matches the impedance of the transmission line. In the
example shown, the transmission line is coaxial cable, so a 4:1 balun transformer is used
between the stub and the transmission line. The two adjustments to make in this system are: (1) the distance of the short from the feedpoint and (2) the distance of the
transmission line tap point from the feedpoint. Both are adjusted for minimum VSWR.
The gamma match is basically a half delta match, and operates according to similar principles (Fig. 18-4). The shield (outer conductor) of the coaxial cable is connected to the center point of the radiator element. The center conductor of the
coaxial cable series feeds the gamma element through a variable capacitor.

VHF/UHF antenna examples
Although it is probably not necessary to reiterate the point, VHF/UHF antennas are not
substantially different from HF antennas, especially those for the higher bands. However, for various practical reasons there are several forms that are specially suited, or at
least popular, in the VHF/UHF bands. In this section we will take a look at some of them.

Coaxial vertical
The coaxial vertical is a quarter-wavelength vertically polarized antenna that is popular on VHF/UHF. There are two varieties. In Fig. 18-5A we see the coaxial antenna
made with coaxial cable. Although not terribly practical for long-term installation,
the coax-coax antenna is very useful for short-term, portable, or emergency applications. For example, a boater found himself adrift, and in dire trouble, after a storm
damaged the boat. The mast-top VHF antenna was washed away, leaving only the
end of the coaxial cable dangling loose. Fortunately, the boat operator was a two-way
radio technician, and he knew how to strip back the coaxial cable to make an impromptu coaxial vertical.
The coax-coax antenna shown in Fig. 18-5A uses a quarter-wavelength radiator
and a quarter-wavelength sleeve. The sleeve consists of the coax braid stripped back
and folded down the length of the coax cable. The maximum length is found from the
equation below (actual length is trimmed from this maximum):
Clamp

Radiator
Center

Insulator

Gamma match

18-4 Gamma matching.

Clamp

Chap18_Carr

4/10/01

3:44 PM

Page 347

VHF/UHF antenna examples 347
Seal end with
RTV or caulk

Center conductor with
insulation left on
/4

Seal with RTV
or caulk

/2

18-5A Coaxial vertical based on coaxial
cable.
Coax braid
folded back
/4

Seal with
solder

To
XMTR

2952 V
L =  in
FMHz

[18.5]

The antenna is mounted by suspending it from above by a short piece of string,
twine, or fishing line. From a practical point of view, the only problem with this form
of antenna is that it tends to deteriorate after a few rainstorms. This effect can be
reduced by sealing the end, and the break between the sleeve and the radiator, with
either silicone RTV or bathtub caulk.
A more permanent method of construction is shown in Fig. 18-5B. The sleeve is
a piece of copper or brass tubing (pipe) about 1 in in diameter. An end cap is fitted
over the end and sweat-soldered into place. The solder is not intended to add mechanical strength, but rather to prevent weathering from destroying the electrical
contact between the two pieces. An SO-239 coaxial connector is mounted on the end
cap. The coax is connected to the SO-239 inside the pipe, which means making the
connection before mounting the end cap.

Chap18_Carr

4/10/01

3:44 PM

Page 348

348 VHF/UHF transmitting and receiving antennas
Radiator
element

/4

Insulator
PL-259
End cap
18-5B Tubing coaxial vertical.

Pipe

/4

Chap18_Carr

4/10/01

3:44 PM

Page 349

VHF/UHF antenna examples 349
The radiator element is a small piece of tubing (or brazing rod) soldered to
the center conductor of a PL-259 coaxial connector. An insulator is used to prevent the rod from shorting to the outer shell of the PL-259. (Note: an insulator salvaged from the smaller variety of banana plug can be shaved a small amount with
a fine file and made to fit inside the PL-259. It allows enough center clearance for
1
⁄8-inch or 3⁄16-inch brass tubing.)
Alternatively, the radiator element can be soldered to a banana plug. The normalsize banana plug happens to fit into the female center conductor of the SO-239.

Collinear vertical
Gain in antennas is provided by directivity. In other words, by taking the power radiated by the antenna, and projecting it into a limited direction, we obtain the appearance of higher radiated power. In fact, the effective radiated power (ERP) of the
antenna is merely its feedpoint power multiplied by its gain. Although most antenna
patterns are shown in the horizontal dimension (as viewed from above), it is also possible to obtain gain by compressing the vertical aspect. In this manner it is possible to
have a vertical antenna that produces gain. Figure 18-6 shows a collinear gain antenna,
with vertical polarization and a horizontally omnidirectional pattern. Incidentally,
when mounted horizontally the pattern becomes bidirectional.
The collinear antenna shown in Fig. 18-6 is basically a pair of stacked collinear
arrays. Each array consists of a quarter-wavelength section A and a half-wavelength
section C separated by a quarter-wavelength phase reversing stub B. The phase reversal stub preserves in-phase excitation for the outer element (referenced to the
inner element).
The feedpoint is between the two elements of the array (i.e., between the A sections). The coaxial-cable impedance is transformed by a 4:1 balun transformer (see
Fig. 18-1A). Alternatively, 300-Ω twin lead can be used for the transmission line. If
this alternative is used, then the use of UHF shielded twin lead is highly recommended. If the transmitter lacks the balanced output needed to feed twin lead, then
use a balun at the input end of the twin lead (i.e., right at the transmitter).

Yagi antennas
The Yagi beam antenna is a highly directional gain antenna, and is used both in HF
and VHF/UHF systems. The antenna is relatively easy to build at VHF/UHF. In fact,
it is easier than for HF systems. The basic Yagi was covered in Chap. 12, so we will
only show examples of practical VHF devices. A 6-m Yagi antenna is shown in Fig.
18-7. This particular antenna is a four-element model. The reflector and directors
can be mounted directly to a metallic boom, because they are merely parasitic. The
driven element, however, must be insulated from the metal boom.
The driven element shown in Fig. 18-7 is a folded dipole. While this is common
practice at VHF, because it tends to broadband the antenna, it is not strictly necessary. The dimensions of the driven element are found from Eq. 18.4. Set the equation
equal to 300 Ω, select the diameter of the tubing from commercially available
sources, and then calculate the spacing.
Example 18-2 Calculate the spacing of a 300-Ω folded dipole when 3⁄4-in tubing is used in its construction.

Chap18_Carr

4/10/01

3:44 PM

Page 350

350 VHF/UHF transmitting and receiving antennas

C
38 in

B
1 in.
19.5 in
19 in

A

VHF
balun
4:1

A
19 in
19.5 in
1 in.
B

C

38 in

Coax to
XMTR

18-6 Vertical collinear antenna.

4/10/01

3:44 PM

Page 351

VHF/UHF antenna examples 351
2.62 m

Director
No. 2

144.8 cm

2.67 m

Director
No. 1

116.9 cm

2.79 m
Driven
element
4:1

Chap18_Carr

VHF balun

116.8 cm
Coax to XMTR

Reflector
2.95 m

18-7 Six-meter beam antenna.

Solution:
2S
Zo = 276 log10 
d
2S
300 Ω  276 log10 
d
2S
300
  log10 
276
d
2S
1.08  log10 
d
2S
101.08  
d
Using 0.75-in pipe results in
2S
101.08  
0.75
12.02  2.67S
so
S  4.5 in

Chap18_Carr

4/10/01

3:44 PM

Page 352

352 VHF/UHF transmitting and receiving antennas
C

31
cm

30.5
cm

Director no. 2

B

A

50
cm

Coax
(see text)

Reflector

30
cm

Director no. 3

22
Wood

Director no. 4

30
cm

D

Driven element

E

Director no. 1

F

Mast
Tie
wire

A:102 cm
B:98 cm
C:91.5 cm
D:90 cm
E:89 cm
F:88 cm

Solder

22 Boom

Solder

18-8 Two-meter vertical beam.

Two-meter yagi
Figure 18-8 shows the construction details for a six-element 2-meter Yagi beam antenna. This antenna is built using a 2  2-in wooden boom and elements made of either
brass or copper rod. Threaded brass rod is particularly useful, but not strictly necessary. The job of securing the elements (other than the driven element) is easier when
threaded rod is used, because it allows a pair of hex nuts, one on either side of the
2  2-in boom, to be used to secure the element. Nonthreaded elements can be secured with RTV sealing a press-fit. Alternatively, tie wires (see inset to Fig. 18-8) can
be used to secure the rods. A hole is drilled through the 2  2 to admit the rod or tubing. The element is secured by wrapping a tie wire around the rod on either side of the
2  2, and then soldering it in place. The tie wire is no. 14 to no. 10 solid wire.
Mounting of the antenna is accomplished by using a mast secured to the boom
with an appropriate clamp. One alternative is to use an end-flange clamp, such as

Chap18_Carr

4/10/01

3:44 PM

Page 353

VHF/UHF antenna examples 353
is sometimes used to support pole lamps, etc. The mast should be attached to the
boom at the center of gravity, which is also known as the balance point. If you try
to balance the antenna in one hand unsupported, there is one (and only one)
point at which it is balanced (and won’t fall). Attach the mast hardware at, or
near, this point in order to prevent normal gravitational torques from tearing the
mounting apart.
The antenna is fed with coaxial cable at the center of the driven element. Ordinarily, either a matching section of coax, or a gamma match, will be needed because the effect of parasitic elements on the driven element feedpoint impedance
is to reduce it.

⁄8 -wavelength 2-m antenna

5

The 5⁄8-wavelength antenna (Fig. 18-9) is popular on 2 m for mobile operation because it is easy to construct, and it provides a small amount of gain relative to a dipole. The radiator element is 5⁄8-wavelength, so its physical length is found from:
7380
L   in
FMHz

[18.6]

The 5⁄8-wavelength antenna is not a good match to any of the common forms of
coaxial cables. Either a matching section of cable, or an inductor match, is normally
used. In Fig. 18-9 an inductor match is used. The matching coil consists of 2 to 3
turns of no. 12 wire, wound over a 1⁄2-in OD form, 1⁄2-in long. The radiator element can
be tubing, brazing rod, or a length of heavy “piano wire.” Alternatively, for low-power
systems, it can be a telescoping antenna that is bought as a replacement for portable
radios or televisions. These antennas have the advantage of being adjustable to resonance without the need for cutting.

J-pole antennas
The J-pole antenna is another popular form of vertical on the VHF bands. It can be
used at almost any frequency, although the example shown in Fig. 18-10 is for 2 m.
The antenna radiator is 3⁄4-wavelength long, so its dimension is found from
8838
L   in
[18.7]
FMHz
and the quarter-wavelength matching section length from
2952
L =  in
FMHz

[18.8]

Taken together the matching section and the radiator form a parallel transmission line with a characteristic impedance that is 4 times the coaxial cable impedance. If 50-Ω coax is used, and the elements are made from 0.5 in OD pipe,
then a spacing of 1.5 in will yield an impedance of about 200 Ω. Impedance matching is accomplished by a gamma match consisting of a 25-pF variable capacitor,
connected by a clamp to the radiator, about 6 in (experiment with placement)
above the base.

Chap18_Carr

4/10/01

3:44 PM

Page 354

354 VHF/UHF transmitting and receiving antennas

L

18-9

#12 Wire
2 to 3
turns
0.5 in. dia.
0.5 in. long

For

5
; LFT  615
8
F

MHz

LIN 

7380
FMHz

5

⁄8-wavelength 2-m antenna.

Chap18_Carr

4/10/01

3:45 PM

Page 355

VHF/UHF antenna examples 355

3/4

Insulator

/4 Matching section

/4

A
B

C

C
D

B

D
SO-239
18-10 J-pole antenna.

A

Chap18_Carr

4/10/01

3:45 PM

Page 356

356 VHF/UHF transmitting and receiving antennas

Groundplane
The groundplane antenna is a vertical radiator situated above an artificial RF
ground consisting of quarter-wavelength radiators. Groundplane antennas can be either 1⁄4-wavelength or 5⁄8-wavelength (although for the latter case impedance matching is needed—see the previous example).
Figure 18-11 shows how to construct an extremely simple groundplane antenna for 2 m and above. The construction is too lightweight for 6-m antennas
(in general), because the element lengths on 6-m antennas are long enough to
make their weight too great for this type of construction. The base of the antenna is a single SO-239 chassis-type coaxial connector. Be sure to use the type
that requires four small machine screws to hold it to the chassis, and not the
single-nut variety.
The radiator element is a piece of 3⁄16-in or 4-mm brass tubing. This tubing can be
bought at hobby stores that sell airplanes and other models. The sizes quoted just
happen to fit over the center pin of an SO-239 with only a slight tap from a lightweight hammer—and I do mean slight tap. If the inside of the tubing and the connector pin are pretinned with solder, then sweat soldering the joint will make a good
electrical connection that is resistant to weathering. Cover the joint with clear lacquer spray for added protection.
The radials are also made of tubing. Alternatively, rods can also be used for this
purpose. At least four radials are needed for a proper antenna (only one is shown in
Fig. 18-11). This number is optimum because they are attached to the SO-239
mounting holes, and there are only four holes. Flatten one end of the radial, and drill
a small hole in the center of the flattened area. Mount the radial to the SO-239 using
small hardware (4-40, etc.).
The SO-239 can be attached to a metal L bracket. While it is easy to fabricate such
a bracket, it is also possible to buy suitable brackets in any well-equipped hardware
store. While shopping at one do-it-yourself type of store, I found several reasonable
candidate brackets. The bracket is attached to a length of 2  2-in lumber that serves
as the mast.

Halo antennas
One of the more saintly antennas used on the VHF boards is the halo (Fig. 18-12). This
antenna basically takes a half-wavelength dipole and bends it into a circle. The ends of the
dipole are separated by a capacitor. In some cases, a transmitting-type mica “button” capacitor is used, but in others (and perhaps more commonly), the halo capacitor consists
of two 3-in disks separated by a plastic dielectric. While air also serves as a good (and perhaps better) dielectric, the use of plastic allows mechanical rigidity to the system.

Quad beam antennas
The quad antenna was introduced in the chapter on beams. It is, nonetheless, also
emerging as a very good VHF/UHF antenna. It should go without saying that the antenna is a lot easier to construct at VHF/UHF frequencies than it is at HF frequencies! Figure 18-13 shows a modest example.
There are several methods for building the quad antenna, and Fig. 18-13 represents only one of them. The radiator element can be any of several materials,

Chap18_Carr

4/10/01

3:45 PM

Page 357

VHF/UHF antenna examples 357

3/16 In. (or 4-mm)

brass tubing

22
Mast

L-bracket
Sweat solder
End flattened

SO-239

18-11 Small VHF groundplane construction.

Radials
(four or
more)

Chap18_Carr

4/10/01

3:45 PM

Page 358

358 VHF/UHF transmitting and receiving antennas

C

/2

Feedpoint
18-12 Halo antenna.

including heavy solid wire (no. 8 to no. 12), tubing, or metal rods. The overall
lengths of the elements are given by:
Driven element:
11,826
L =  in
FMHz

[18.9]

12,562
L =  in
FMHz

[18.10]

11,248
L =  in
FMHz

[18.11]

Reflector:

Director:

There are several alternatives for making the supports for the radiator. Because
of the lightweight construction, almost any method can be adapted for this purpose.
In the case shown in Fig. 18-13, the spreaders are made from either 1-in furring
strips, trim strips, or (at above 2 m) even wooden paint stirring sticks. The sticks are
cut to length, and then half-notched in the center (Fig. 18-13, detail B). The two
spreaders for each element are joined together at right angles and glued (Fig. 18-13,
detail C). The spreaders can be fastened to the wooden boom at points S in detail C.
The usual rules regarding element spacing (0.15 to 0.31 wavelength) are followed.
See the information on quad antennas in Chap. 12 for further details. Quads have
been successfully built for all amateur bands up to 1296 MHz.

Chap18_Carr

4/10/01

3:45 PM

Page 359

VHF/UHF antenna examples 359
Overall lengths:
Reflector: L 

12,562
in
FMHz

Director: L 

11,248
in
FMHz

Driven element: L 

11,826
in
FMHz

Wire
or
rod

A
C

Glue

B
S
S

Notch

18-13 Quad loop construction on VHF.

Chap18_Carr

4/10/01

3:45 PM

Page 360

360 VHF/UHF transmitting and receiving antennas

VHF/UHF scanner band antennas
The hobby of shortwave listening has always had a subset of adherents who listen exclusively to the VHF/UHF bands. In those bands are found a rich variety of services
from commercial two-way radios, police and fire systems, and others. Many of these
people are serious DXers, but others have a little of the voyeur in them (they like to listen to what’s going on in the community by monitoring the police frequencies). As long
as they neither respond to the scene of a police or fire action, nor use the information
gained from monitoring in an illegal manner, they are perfectly free to listen in.
A few people have an unusually practical element to their VHF/UHF listening. At
least one person known to the author routinely tunes in the local taxicab company’s
frequency as soon as she orders a cab. She then listens for her own address. She
knows from that approximately when to expect the cab.
In the early 1960s, when all VHF monitor receivers were crystal-controlled (and
relatively expensive), the listener had a very limited selection of frequencies to
choose from. Having worked in various shops that sold those receivers, I can recall
that most of our customers tended to be police officers, fire fighters (or volunteers),
or journalists covering the local crime news. However, modern scanners operate on
both major VHF bands (low and high), plus UHF bands and others.

Scanner-vision antennas
The antennas used by scanner listeners are widely varied, and (in some cases) overpriced. Although it is arguable that a total coverage VHF/UHF antenna is worth the
money, and it probably is, there are other possibilities that should be considered.
First, don’t overlook the use of television antennas for scanner monitoring! The
television bands (about 80 channels from 54 MHz to around 800 MHz) encompass
most of the ordinarily used scanner frequencies. Although antenna performance is
not optimized for the scanner frequencies, it is also not “zero” on those frequencies.
If you already have an “all channel” TV antenna installed, then it is a simple matter
to connect the antenna to the scanner receiver. (Note: if the antenna uses 300-Ω
twin lead, then install a 4:1 balun transformer that accepts 300 Ω in and produces 75
Ω out. These transformers are usually available at TV shops, video shops—including
videotape rental places—and Radio Shack stores.)
The directional characteristic of the TV antenna makes it both an advantage
and a disadvantage to the scanner user. If the antenna has a rotator, then there is
no problem. Just rotate the antenna to the direction of interest. However, if the antenna is fixed, and the station of interest is elsewhere than where the antenna is
pointed, then there is a bit of a problem. Nevertheless, some reception is possible
for at least three reasons. One is that the main beam of the antenna is not infinitely
thin, so the station of interest might well be within the beam—even if off the point
a little bit. Second, there are always sidelobes on an antenna. These are areas outside of the main beam that offer reduced, but nonzero, reception characteristics.
Finally, the sidelobes and main lobe of the antenna are optimized for the TV bands,
and may not obtain the same directivity on certain scanner frequencies. It is,
therefore, possible that a TV antenna will have an unusual lobe in the direction of
interest for the scanner channel.

Chap18_Carr

4/10/01

3:45 PM

Page 361

VHF/UHF scanner band antennas 361
The TV antenna also offers other possibilities. The hardware and electronics,
normally found useful on TV antenna systems, are also useful for scanner antennas.
The use of the mounting hardware is obvious, but less obvious is the use of components such as multiset couplers, impedance transformers, and wideband amplifiers.
For example, Fig. 18-14 shows two scanner antennas joined together into a single
Ant. 2

Ant. 1

Twoset
coupler

18-14 Combining two antennas with
TV hardware.

To
receiver

L

18-15 VHF/UHF “bowtie” dipoles for
broadband reception.
L

Chap18_Carr

4/10/01

3:45 PM

Page 362

362 VHF/UHF transmitting and receiving antennas
transmission line using a two-set coupler. Although intended to allow two television
sets to receive a signal from the same antenna, the device also works to combine two
antennas into a single transmission line. Two popular TV uses include two antennas
for different directions and VHF and UHF antennas that share the same downlead.
Be sure to buy a weatherproof model if you intend to mount the coupler on the
antenna mast (the correct place for it) (Fig. 18-15).
TV antenna amplifiers are used to increase the weak signal from a distant station
to a level compatible with the TV receiver. Because these amplifiers are wideband
designs, they will also work well for the scanner bands that are inclusive within the
54- to 800-MHz TV bands. Some models are intended to be part of the antenna, while
others are mounted indoors, some distance from the antenna. The basic rule of
thumb is to place the amplifier as close as possible to the “head end” of the system
where the antenna is located. This situation will permit signals to be built up to a
level considerably above the noise level before being attenuated in the transmission
line losses.
TV/FM receiver folded dipoles made of twin-lead transmission line also work
well at other VHF/UHF frequencies. Figures 18-16A and 18-16B show the details of
their construction.

Scanner skyhooks
Other antennas not to be overlooked are the CB, or amateur radio, high-frequency
(shortwave) antennas. Many amateur radio operators use their 80-m dipole antenna

L

Downlead

L

5904
Inches
FMHz

18-16A Receiver folded dipole antenna made of
300 Ω twin lead.

TV-type
4:1 BALUN

18-16B Poles made of twin-lead transmission VHF frequencies.
75  coax

Chap18_Carr

4/10/01

3:45 PM

Page 363

VHF/UHF scanner band antennas 363
on 2 m (144 to 148 MHz) and find that it has the gain and directivity characteristics
of a longwire antenna. Similarly, with vertical “ham” and CB antennas, they have apparent gain on some VHF frequencies and will at least perform to some extent
on others.
Even the lowly “random length” wire antenna used for your shortwave receiver ought to turn in decent performance as a VHF/UHF longwire antenna.
These antennas are simply a 30- to 150-ft length of no. 14 wire attached to a distant support.
Figure 18-17 shows two variants to an antenna that is popular with VHF/UHF receiver operators: the drooping dipole. These antennas are similar to the invertedvee dipole, in that they consist of two quarter-wavelength radiator elements. Unlike
the ordinary dipole, the ends of the radiators, in the single-band drooping dipole of
Fig. 18-17A, are lowered. The drooping dipole can be made using an SO-239 UHF
coaxial connector as the support for either stiff wire, brass hobbyist tubing, or brazing rod elements cut to /4 each. The antenna can be made into a multiband, or very
wideband, antenna by connecting several pairs of drooping dipoles in parallel, as in
Fig. 18-17B.

SO-239
18-17A Drooping dipole.

18-17B Multiband drooping dipole.
SO-239

Chap18_Carr

4/10/01

3:45 PM

Page 364

364 VHF/UHF transmitting and receiving antennas

L

18-18A Vertical dipole.

L

L

2832
Inches
FMHz

The vertical dipole (Fig. 18-18A) also finds use in the VHF/UHF region. Each
element is /4 long, and its physical length can be found from
2832
L =  in
FMHz

[18.12]

This antenna can be built with the same types of materials as the drooping dipole. Although several different construction techniques are popular, the method of Fig. 1818B is probably the most popular with homebrew builders.
A groundplane antenna for VHF/UHF frequencies is shown in Fig. 18-19. The
antenna sits on an L bracket mounted to a 2  4-in wooden mast or support. The L
bracket can be manufactured for the purpose, or purchased at Happy Harry’s hardware emporium. The base of the antenna is a chassis-mount SO-239 UHF coaxial
connector. A quarter-wave radiator element is made from 1⁄8-in brass tubing, or
brazing rod, soldered to the center conductor pin of the SO-239. Similarly, radials
can be made from the same type of material, but soldered directly to the body of the
SO-239 (this action connects it to the coaxial cable shield). The four mounting
holes of the SO-239 make reasonable anchors for the radials. Solder them for electrical integrity.

Chap18_Carr

4/10/01

3:45 PM

Page 365

VHF/UHF scanner band antennas 365

Wood
support

Brass
tubing

Coaxial
cable to
receiver

18-18B Construction of VHF vertical dipole.

A coaxial vertical can be made from 1-in brass tubing or copper plumbing pipe,
and either brazing rod or brass tubing (Fig. 18-20). The sleeve is fitted with an end
cap that has an SO-239 mounted on it (see inset). The radiator element can be made
with a mate to the SO-239, namely the PL-259 coaxial plug. The radiator element is
soldered to the center conductor, and it is insulated from the shield. You can buy
coaxial whips with this type of construction, so you may not have to actually build
the radiator element.
Additional gain, about 3 dB, can be achieved by stacking VHF/UHF antennas together. Figure 18-21 shows a typical arrangement in which two half-wavelength dipole
antennas are connected together through a quarter-wavelength harness of RG-59/U
coaxial cable. This harness is shorter than a quarter wavelength by the velocity factor of
the coaxial cable:

Chap18_Carr

4/10/01

3:45 PM

Page 366

366 VHF/UHF transmitting and receiving antennas

Brass tubing
or brazing
rod element

L-bracket

SO-239

Radials

Wooden
support

18-19 Construction of VHF groundplane for receivers.

2832V
L=
FMHz

[18.13]

where
L is the length, in inches
V is the velocity factor (typically 0.66 or 0.80 for common coax)
FMHz is the frequency, in megahertz
The antennas can be oriented in the same direction to increase gain, or orthogonally (as shown in Fig. 18-21) to make it more omnidirectional.
Because the impedance of two identical dipoles, fed in parallel, is one-half
that of a single dipole, it is necessary to have an impedance-matching section

Chap18_Carr

4/10/01

3:45 PM

Page 367

VHF/UHF scanner band antennas 367

Radiator
Coax
thru

Pipe
end
cap

Cap
PL-259

Sleeve

Coaxial cable

18-20 Coaxial dipole vertical.

Chap18_Carr

4/10/01

3:45 PM

Page 368

368 VHF/UHF transmitting and receiving antennas

/2

/4 -RG-59/U

/2
/4-RG-58/U

Matching section

RG-59/U
Main transmission
line

18-21 Stacking VHF antennas.

made of RG-58/U coaxial cable. This cable is then fed with RG-59/U coax from
the receiver.
There is nothing magical about scanner receivers that require any form of
antenna that is significantly different from other VHF/UHF antennas. Although the
designs might be optimized for VHF or UHF, these antennas are basically the same
as others shown in this book. As a matter of fact, almost any antennas, from any
chapter, can be used by at least some scanner operators.

19

CHAPTER

Microwave waveguides
and antennas
THE MICROWAVE PORTION OF THE RADIO SPECTRUM COVERS FREQUENCIES FROM ABOUT

900 MHz to 300 GHz, with wavelengths in free-space ranging from 33 cm down to
1 mm. Transmission lines can be used at frequencies from dc to about 50 or 60 GHz,
although, above 5 GHz, only short runs are practical, because attenuation increases
dramatically as frequency increases. There are three types of losses in conventional
transmission lines: ohmic, dielectric, and radiation. The ohmic losses are caused
by the current flowing in the resistance of the conductors making up the transmission lines. Because of the skin effect, which increases resistance at higher frequencies, these losses tend to increase in the microwave region. Dielectric losses
are caused by the electric field acting on the molecules of the insulator and
thereby causing heating through molecular agitation. Radiation losses represent
loss of energy as an electromagnetic wave propagates away from the surface of the
transmission line conductor.
Losses on long runs of coaxial transmission line (the type most commonly used)
cause concern even as low as the 400-MHz region. Also, because of the increased
losses, power handling capability decreases at high frequencies. Therefore, at higher
microwave frequencies, or where long runs make coax attenuation losses unacceptable, or where high power levels would overheat the coax, waveguides are used in
lieu of transmission lines.
What is a waveguide? Consider the light pipe analogy depicted in Fig. 19-1. A
flashlight serves as our “RF source,” which (given that light is also an electromagnetic wave) is not altogether unreasonable. In Fig. 19-1A the source radiates into
free space and spreads out as a function of distance. The intensity per unit area, at
the destination (a wall), falls off as a function of distance (D) according to the inverse square law (1/D2).
But now consider the transmission scheme in Fig. 19-1B. The light wave still
propagates over distance D, but is now confined to the interior of a mirrored pipe.
Almost all of the energy (less small losses) coupled to the input end is delivered
to the output end, where the intensity is practically undiminished. Although not

Copyright 2001 - the McGraw-Hill Companies

369

Chap19_Carr

4/10/01

3:39 PM

Page 370

370 Microwave waveguides and antennas

D

A

Large diffused beam

"Light pipe"

B

Small intense beam
19-1 Waveguide analogy to light pipe.

perfect, the light pipe analogy neatly summarizes, on a simple level, the operation
of microwave waveguides.
Thus, we can consider the waveguide as an “RF pipe” without seeming too
serenely detached from reality. Similarly, fiber-optic technology is waveguidelike at
optical (IR and visible) wavelengths. In fact, the analogy between fiber optics and
waveguide can withstand more rigorous comparison than the simplistic light pipe
analogy.
The internal walls of the waveguide are not mirrored surfaces, as in our optical
analogy, but are, rather, electrical conductors. Most waveguides are made of aluminum, brass, or copper. In order to reduce ohmic losses, some waveguides have their
internal surfaces electroplated with either gold or silver, both of which have lower resistivities than the other metals mentioned above.
Waveguides are hollow metal pipes, and can have either circular or rectangular
cross sections (although the rectangular are, by far, the most common). Figure 19-2
shows an end view of the rectangular waveguide. The dimension a is the wider dimension, and b is the narrower. These letters are considered the standard form of
notation for waveguide dimensions, and will be used in the equations developed in
this chapter.

Development of the rectangular
waveguide from parallel transmission lines
One way of visualizing how a waveguide works is to develop the theory of waveguides
from the theory of elementary parallel transmission lines (see Chap. 3). Figure 19-3A
shows the basic parallel transmission line which was introduced in Chap. 3. The line

Chap19_Carr

4/10/01

3:39 PM

Page 371

Development of the rectangular waveguide from parallel transmission lines 371
consists of two parallel conductors separated by an air dielectric. Because air won’t
support the conductors, ceramic or other material insulators are used as supports.
There are several reasons why the parallel transmission line per se is not used at
microwave frequencies. Skin effect increases ohmic losses to a point that is unacceptable. Also, the insulators supporting the two conductors are significantly more

a

b

19-2 Rectangular waveguide (end view).

A

Fields not confined
in this direction

Field confined
in this direction

B

End view of two wire line
19-3 Development of waveguide from parallel line.

Chap19_Carr

4/10/01

3:39 PM

Page 372

372 Microwave waveguides and antennas
lossy at microwave frequencies than at lower frequencies. Finally, radiation losses
increase dramatically. Figure 19-3B shows the electric fields surrounding the conductors. The fields add algebraically (either constructively or destructively), resulting in pinching of the resultant field along one axis, and bulging along the other. This
geometry increases radiation losses at microwave frequencies.
Now let’s consider the quarter-wavelength shorted stub. The “looking-in” impedance of such a stub is infinite. When placed in parallel across a transmission line
(Fig. 19-4A) the stub acts like an insulator. In other words, at its resonant frequency,
the stub is a metallic insulator, and can be used to physically support the transmission line.
Again, because the impedance is infinite, we can connect two quarterwavelength stubs in parallel with each other across the same points on the
transmission line (Fig. 19-4B) without loading down the line impedance. This
arrangement effectively forms a half-wavelength pair. The impedance is still infinite, so no harm is done. Likewise, we can parallel a large number of center-fed
half-wavelength pairs along the line, as might be the case when a long line is supported at multiple points. The waveguide is analogous to an infinite number of
Two wire
transmission
line

Junction

19-4A
Quarter-wave stub analogy.

/
4

Short
circuit

/

4

{
19-4B
Quarter-wave stub analogy
extended.

/

4

{

Chap19_Carr

4/10/01

3:39 PM

Page 373

Propagation modes in waveguides 373

19-4C
Quarter-wave stub analogy
extended even further.
/

/

4

2

center-fed “half-wave pairs” of quarter-wave shorted stubs connected across
the line. The result is the continuous metal pipe structure of the common rectangular waveguide (Fig. 19-4C).
On first glance, relating rectangular waveguide to quarter-wavelength shorted
stubs seems to fall down, except at the exact resonant frequency. It turns out, however, that the analogy also holds up at other frequencies, so long as the frequency is
higher than a certain minimum cutoff frequency. The waveguide thus acts like a highpass filter. There is also a practical upper frequency limit. In general, waveguides support a bandwidth of 30 to 40 percent of cutoff frequency. As shown in Fig. 19-5, the
center line of the waveguide (which represents the points where the conductors
are in the parallel line analogy) becomes a “shorting bar” between segments, and that
“bar” widens or narrows according to operating frequency. Thus, the active region is
still a quarter-wavelength shorted stub.
Below the cutoff frequency, the structure disappears entirely, and the waveguide acts like a parallel transmission line with a low-impedance inductive reactance
shorted across the conductors. When modeled as a pair of quarter-wavelength stubs,
the a dimension of the waveguide is a half-wavelength long. The cutoff frequency is
defined as the frequency at which the a dimension is less than a half-wavelength.

Propagation modes in waveguides
The signal in a microwave waveguide propagates as an electromagnetic wave, not as
a current. Even in a transmission line, the signal propagates as a wave because the
current in motion down the line gives rise to electric and magnetic fields, which behave as an electromagnetic field. The specific type of field found in transmission
lines, however, is a transverse electromagnetic (TEM) field. The term transverse
implies things at right angles to each other, so the electric and magnetic fields
are perpendicular to the direction of travel. In addition to the word “transverse,”
these right-angle waves are said to be “normal” or “orthogonal” to the direction of
travel—three different ways of saying the same thing: right-angledness.

Chap19_Carr

4/10/01

3:39 PM

Page 374

374 Microwave waveguides and antennas
/

4

/

A. Operating frequency

4

a
/

/

b

c

d

4

19-5
Changing frequency does not
affect the analogy.

4

B. Increasing frequency

b

a
/
/

c

d

4

4

C. Decreasing frequency

"a"
Dimension

Chap19_Carr

4/10/01

3:39 PM

Page 375

Propagation modes in waveguides 375

Boundary conditions
The TEM wave will not propagate in a waveguide because certain boundary conditions apply. Although the wave in the waveguide propagates through the air (or inert gas dielectric) in a manner similar to free-space propagation, the phenomenon is
bounded by the walls of the waveguide, and that implies certain conditions must be
met. The boundary conditions for waveguides are
1. The electric field must be orthogonal to the conductor in order to exist at the
surface of that conductor.
2. The magnetic field must not be orthogonal to the surface of the waveguide.
In order to satisfy these boundary conditions the waveguide gives rise to two
types of propagation modes: transverse electric mode (TE mode), and transverse
magnetic mode (TM mode). The TEM mode violates the boundary conditions
because the magnetic field is not parallel to the surface, and so does not occur in
waveguides.
The transverse electric field requirement means that the E field must be perpendicular to the conductor wall of the waveguide. This requirement is met by use
of a proper coupling scheme at the input end of the waveguide. A vertically polarized
coupling radiator will provide the necessary transverse field.
One boundary condition requires that the magnetic (H) field must not be orthogonal to the conductor surface. Because it is at right angles to the E field, it will
meet this requirement (see Fig. 19-6). The planes formed by the magnetic field are
parallel to both the direction of propagation and the wide dimension surface.
As the wave propagates away from the input radiator, it resolves into two components that are not along the axis of propagation, and are not orthogonal to the
walls. The component along the waveguide axis violates the boundary conditions, so
it is rapidly attenuated. For the sake of simplicity, only one component is shown in
Fig. 19-7. Three cases are shown in Fig. 19-7: high, medium, and low frequency. Note
that the angle of incidence with the waveguide wall increases as frequency drops. The
angle rises toward 90° as the cutoff frequency is approached from above. Below
the cutoff frequency the angle is 90°, so the wave bounces back and forth between the
walls without propagating.

Top
view

"a"
Dim.

Weak
H-field
Strong H-field
Cross sectional view at center of side view

"a"
Dim.
/

2

Side "b"
view Dim.
19-6 Magnetic fields in waveguide.

End view
Cross sectional
view /4
from end

Chap19_Carr

4/10/01

3:39 PM

Page 376

376 Microwave waveguides and antennas








A. High frequency

19-7
Frequency effect on propagating
wave.





B. Medium frequency

C. Low frequency
(approaching cutoff)


=  of incidence
 =  of reflection

Coordinate system and dominant mode in waveguides
Figure 19-8 shows the coordinate system used to denote dimensions and directions
in microwave discussions. The a and b dimensions of the waveguide correspond to
the x and y axes of a cartesian coordinate system, and the z axis is the direction of
wave propagation.
In describing the various modes of propagation, use a shorthand notation as
follows:
Txm,n
where
x is E for transverse electric mode, and M for transverse magnetic mode
m is the number of half-wavelengths along the x axis (i.e., a dimension)
n is the number of half-wavelengths along the y axis (i.e., b dimension)

Chap19_Carr

4/10/01

3:39 PM

Page 377

Propagation modes in waveguides 377
The TE10 mode is called the dominant mode, and is the best mode for low attenuation propagation in the z axis. The nomenclature TE10 indicates that there is
one half-wavelength in the a dimension and zero half-wavelengths in the b dimension. The dominant mode exists at the lowest frequency at which the waveguide is a
half-wavelength.

Velocity and wavelength in waveguides
Figures 19-9A and 19-9B show the geometry for two wave components, simplified
for the sake of illustration. There are three different wave velocities to consider with
respect to waveguides: free-space velocity c, group velocity Vg , and phase velocity Vp. The free-space velocity is the velocity of propagation in unbounded free space
(i.e., the speed of light c  3  108 m/s).

a

b

Y
Z

90°

90°
X
TEM,N
TMM,N
19-8 Rectangular waveguide coordinate system.

Chap19_Carr

4/10/01

3:39 PM

Page 378

378 Microwave waveguides and antennas

Antenna
a


b


c

19-9A Antenna radiator in capped waveguide.

B

/

A

a

4

a

g/
4

0

Vg

C

19-9B Wave propagation in waveguide.

The group velocity is the straight line velocity of propagation of the wave down
the center line (z axis) of the waveguides. The value of Vg is always less than c, because the actual path length taken, as the wave bounces back and forth, is longer
than the straight line path (i.e., path ABC is longer than path AC). The relationship
between c and Vg is
Vg  c sin a

[19.1]

Chap19_Carr

4/10/01

3:39 PM

Page 379

Propagation modes in waveguides 379
where
Vg is the group velocity, in meters per second
c is the free-space velocity (3  108 m/s)
a is the angle of incidence in the waveguide
The phase velocity is the velocity of propagation of the spot on the waveguide wall
where the wave impinges (e.g., point B in Fig. 19-9B). This velocity, depending upon
the angle of incidence, can actually be faster than both the group velocity and the speed
of light. The relationship between phase and group velocities can be seen in the beach
analogy. Consider an ocean beach, on which the waves arrive from offshore at an angle
other than 90°. In other words, the arriving wavefronts are not parallel to the shore.
The arriving waves have a group velocity Vg. But as a wave hits the shore, it will strike a
point down the beach first, and the “point of strike” races up the beach at a much faster
phase velocity Vp, that is even faster than the group velocity. In a microwave waveguide,
the phase velocity can be greater than c, as can be seen from Eq. 19.2:
c
Vp  
sin a

[19.2]

Example 19-1 Calculate the group and phase velocities for an angle of incidence of 33°.
Solution:
(a) Group velocity
Vg  c sin a
 (3  108)(sin 33°)
 (3  108)(0.5446)  1.6  108 m/s
(b) Phase velocity
Vp  c/sin a
 (3  108 m/s)/sin 33°
 (3  108 m/s)/(0.5446)
 5.51  108 m/s
For this problem the solutions are
c  3  108 m/s
Vp  5.51  108 m/s
Vg  1.6  108 m/s
We can also write a relationship between all three velocities by combining Eqs.
19.1 and 19.2, resulting in

Chap19_Carr

4/10/01

3:39 PM

Page 380

380 Microwave waveguides and antennas
c  V

V
p g

[19.3]

In any wave phenomenon the product of frequency and wavelength is the velocity. Thus, for a TEM wave in unbounded free space we know that:
c  F o

[19.4]

Because the frequency F is fixed by the generator, only the wavelength can
change when the velocity changes. In a microwave waveguide we can relate phase
velocity to wavelength as the wave is propagated in the waveguide:
c
Vp  
o

[19.5]

where:
Vp is the phase velocity, in meters per second
c is the free-space velocity (3108 m/s)
 is the wavelength in the waveguide, in meters
o is the wavelength in free space (c/F), in meters (see Eq. 19.4)
Equation 19.5 can be rearranged to find the wavelength in the waveguide:
Vpo

c

[19.6]

Example 19-2 A 5.6-GHz microwave signal is propagated in a waveguide.
Assume that the internal angle of incidence to the waveguide surfaces is 42 degrees.
Calculate (a) phase velocity, (b) wavelength in unbounded free space, and (c) wavelength of the signal in the waveguide.
Solution:
(a) Phase velocity
c
Vp  
sin a
3  108 m/s
 
sin 42°
3  108 m/s
  4.5  10 m/s
0.6991
8

(b) Wavelength in free space
o  c/F
 (3  108 m/s)/(5.6  109 Hz)
 0.054 m

Chap19_Carr

4/10/01

3:39 PM

Page 381

Cutoff frequency (Fc ) 381
(c) Wavelength in waveguide
Vp
o

c
(4.5  108 m/s)(0.054 m)
 
 0.08 m
3  108 m/s
Comparing, we find that the free-space wavelength is 0.054 m, and the wavelength inside of the waveguide increases to 0.08 m.

Cutoff frequency (F )
c

The propagation of signals in a waveguide depends, in part, upon the operating
frequency of the applied signal. As covered earlier, the angle of incidence made by
the plane wave to the waveguide wall is a function of frequency. As the frequency
drops, the angle of incidence increases toward 90°.
The propagation of waves depends on the angle of incidence and the associated
reflection phenomena. Indeed, both phase and group velocities are functions of the
angle of incidence. When the frequency drops to a point where the angle of incidence is 90°, then group velocity is meaningless.
We can define a general mode equation based on our system of notation:



n
 

2b

1
m 2

2  
(c)
2a

2

[19.7]

where
c is the longest wavelength that will propagate
a, b are the waveguide dimensions (see Fig. 19-2)
m, n are integers that define the number of half-wavelengths that will fit in the a
and b dimensions, respectively
Evaluating Eq. 19.7 reveals that the longest TE-mode signal that will propagate
in the dominant mode (TE10) is given by
c  2a

[19.8]

from which we can write an expression for the cutoff frequency:
c
Fc  
2a
where
Fc is the lowest frequency that will propagate, in hertz
c is the speed of light (3108 m/s)
a is the wide waveguide dimension

[19.9]

Chap19_Carr

4/10/01

3:39 PM

Page 382

382 Microwave waveguides and antennas
Example 19-3 A rectangular waveguide has dimensions of 3  5 cm. Calculate the TE10 mode cutoff frequency.
Solution:
c
Fc  
2a
(3  108 m/s
 
1m
(2) 5 cm  
100 cm





3  108 m/s
 
(2)(0.05 m)  3 GHz
Equation 19.7 assumes that the dielectric inside the waveguide is air. A more
generalized form, which can accommodate other dielectrics, is
1
Fc  
2u
e

m
n
 


a
b
2

2

[19.10]

where
e is the dielectric constant
u is the permeability constant
For air dielectrics, u  uo and e  eo, from which
1
c
u

e
o o

[19.11]

To determine the cutoff wavelength, we can rearrange Eq. 19.10 to the form:
2
c  
m 2
n 2


a
b

  

[19.12]

One further expression for air-filled waveguide calculates the actual wavelength
in the waveguide from a knowledge of the free-space wavelength and actual operating frequency:
o
g  
[19.13]
Fc 2
1 – 
F
where



g is the wavelength in the waveguide
o is the wavelength in free space
Fc is the waveguide cutoff frequency
F is the operating frequency

Chap19_Carr

4/10/01

3:39 PM

Page 383

Waveguide impedance 383
Example 19-4 A waveguide with a 4.5-GHz cutoff frequency is excited with a
6.7-GHz signal. Find (a) the wavelength in free space and (b) the wavelength in the
waveguide.
Solution:
(a)
o  c/F
3  108 m/s
 
109 Hz
6.7 GHz  
1 GHz
3  108 m/s


 0.0448 m
6.7  109 Hz
(b)
o
g  
2
c
1 F
F



0.0448 m
 
4.5 GHz 2
1 
6.7 GHz



0.0448 m
 
1  0.67
0.0448
   0.136 m
0.33
Transverse magnetic modes also propagate in waveguides, but the base TM10
mode is excluded by the boundary conditions. Thus, the TM11 mode is the lowest
magnetic mode that will propagate.

Waveguide impedance
All forms of transmission line, including the waveguide, exhibit a characteristic impedance, although in the case of waveguide it is a little difficult to pin down conceptually. This concept was developed for ordinary transmission lines in Chap. 3. For a
waveguide, the characteristic impedance is approximately equal to the ratio of the
electric and magnetic fields (E/H), and converges (as a function of frequency) to
the intrinsic impedance of the dielectric (Fig. 19-10). The impedance of the waveguide is a function of waveguide characteristic impedance (Zo ) and the wavelength
in the waveguide:

Chap19_Carr

4/10/01

3:39 PM

Page 384

384 Microwave waveguides and antennas

Impedance

Z

Intrinsic impedance
N

of dielectric

F
Fc

Frequency
19-10 Impedance versus frequency.

Zog
Z
o

[19.14]

Or, for rectangular waveguide, with constants taken into consideration:
120 π g
Z  
o

[19.15]

The propagation constant B for rectangular waveguide is a function of both
cutoff frequency and operating frequency:
B  W eu


1FF

2

c

from which we can express the TE-mode impedance:

[19.16]

Chap19_Carr

4/10/01

3:39 PM

Page 385

Waveguide terminations 385
u
e
ZTE  
Fc 2
1 
F



[19.17]

and the TM-mode impedance:
ZTM  377



2
c
1 F
F

[19.18]

Waveguide terminations
When an electromagnetic wave propagates down a waveguide, it must eventually
reach the end of the guide. If the end is open, then the wave will propagate into freespace. The horn radiator is an example of an unterminated waveguide. If the waveguide terminates in a metallic wall, then the wave reflects back down the waveguide,
from whence it came. The interference between incident and reflected waves forms
standing waves (see Chap. 3). Such waves are stationary in space, but vary in the
time domain.
In order to prevent standing waves, or more properly, the reflections that give
rise to standing waves, the waveguide must be terminated in a matching impedance. When a properly designed antenna is used to terminate the waveguide, it
forms the matched load required to prevent reflections. Otherwise, a dummy load
must be provided. Figure 19-11 shows several types of dummy load.
The classic termination is shown in Fig. 19-11A. The “resistor” making up the
dummy load is a mixture of sand and graphite. When the fields of the propagated
wave enter the load, they cause currents to flow, which in turn cause heating.
Thus, the RF power dissipates in the sand-graphite rather than being reflected
back down the waveguide.
A second dummy load is shown in Fig. 19-11B. The resistor element is a carbonized rod critically placed at the center of the electric field. The E field causes
currents to flow, resulting in I 2R losses that dissipate the power.
Bulk loads, similar to the graphite-sand chamber, are shown in Fig. 19-11C, D,
and E. Using bulk material such as graphite or a carbonized synthetic material, these
loads are used in much the same way as the sand load (i.e., currents set up, and I 2R
losses dissipate the power).
The resistive vane load is shown in Fig. 19-11F. The plane of the element is orthogonal to the magnetic lines of force. When the magnetic lines cut across the vane,
currents are induced, which gives rise to the I 2R losses. Very little RF energy reaches
the metallic end of the waveguide, so there is little reflected energy and a low VSWR.
There are situations where it isn’t desirable to terminate the waveguide in a
dummy load. Several reflective terminations are shown in Fig. 19-12. Perhaps the
simplest form is the permanent end plate shown in Fig. 19-12A. The metal cover
must be welded or otherwise affixed through a very-low-resistance joint. At the substantial power levels typically handled in transmitter waveguides, even small resistances can be important.
The end plate (shown in Fig. 19-12B) uses a quarter-wavelength cup to reduce
the effect of joint resistances. The cup places the contact joint at a point that is a

Chap19_Carr

4/10/01

3:39 PM

Page 386

386 Microwave waveguides and antennas

Sand & graphite
filled chamber

A

Resistive
rod

B

/

C

2

Wedge

19-11 Dummy loads: (A) sand-graphite chamber; (B) resistive rod; (C) wedge.

Chap19_Carr

4/10/01

3:39 PM

Page 387

Waveguide terminations 387

/

2

Double
wedge

D

Waveguide

E

Absorptive pyramid wedge
Waveguide
Vane dummy load

F

19-11 Dummy loads: (D) double wedge; (E) pyramid wedge; (F) vane dummy load.

Chap19_Carr

4/10/01

3:39 PM

Page 388

388 Microwave waveguides and antennas

A
Permanent plate at end
Contact is at
point of
minimum current

/

4

B
19-12
End terminations.

Removable
/ wave end piece
4
Removable short circuit
Actual short here

/

4

Thumb
screw

Virtual short here

C

Half wave channel
Adjustable plunger

quarter-wavelength from the end. This point is a minimum-current node, so I 2R
losses in the contact resistance become less important.
The adjustable short circuit is shown in Fig. 19-12C. The walls of the waveguide
and the surface of the plunger form a half-wavelength channel. Because the metallic
end of the channel is a short circuit, the impedance reflected back to the front of the
plunger is zero ohms, or nearly so. Thus, a virtual short exists at the points shown.
By this means, the contact (or joint) resistance problem is overcome.

Waveguide joints and bends
Joints and bends in any form of transmission line or waveguide are seen as impedance discontinuities, and so are points at which disruptions occur. Thus, improperly
formed bends and joints are substantial contributors to a poor VSWR. In general,
bends, twists, joints, or abrupt changes in waveguide dimension can deteriorate the
VSWR by giving rise to reflections.
Extensive runs of waveguide are sometimes difficult to make in a straight line.
Although some installations do permit a straight waveguide, many others require directional change. This possibility is especially likely on shipboard installations.
Figure 19-13A shows the proper ways to bend a waveguide around a corner. In each
case, the radius of the bend must be at least two wavelengths at the lowest frequency that will be propagated in the system.
The “twist” shown in Fig. 19-13B is used to rotate the polarity of the E and H
fields by 90°. This type of section is sometimes used in antenna arrays for phasing

Chap19_Carr

4/10/01

3:39 PM

Page 389

Waveguide joints and bends 389
the elements. As in the case of the bend, the twist must be made over a distance of
at least two wavelengths.
When an abrupt 90° transition is needed, it is better to use two successive 45°
bends spaced one-quarter wavelength apart (see Fig. 19-13C). The theory (behind
this kind of bend) is to cause the interference of the direct reflection of one bend,
with the inverted reflection of the other. The resultant relationship between the
fields is reconstructed as if no reflections had taken place.
Joints are necessary in practical waveguides because it simply isn’t possible to
construct a single length of practical size for all situations. Three types of common
joints are used: permanent, semipermanent, and rotating.
To make a permanent joint the two waveguide ends must be machined
extremely flat so that they can be butt-fitted together. A welded or brazed seam
bonds the two sections together. Because such a surface represents a tremendous
discontinuity, reflections and VSWR will result unless the interior surfaces are milled
flat and then polished to a mirror-like finish.
A semipermanent joint allows the joint to be disassembled for repair and maintenance, as well as allowing easier on-site assembly. The most common example of
this class is the choke joint shown in Fig. 19-14.
One surface of the choke joint is machined flat and is a simple butt-end planar
flange. The other surface is the mate to the planar flange, but it has a quarterwavelength circular slot cut at a distance of one-quarter wavelength from the waveguide aperture. The two flanges are shown in side view in Fig. 19-14A, and the
slotted end view is shown in Fig. 19-14B. The method for fitting the two ends together is shown in the oblique view in Fig. 19-14C.

A

At least 2

B
/

4

/

Wide
dimension

Side
view

/
4

4

C
Narrow
dimension

19-13 Bends in waveguide must be gentle.

Chap19_Carr

4/10/01

3:39 PM

Page 390

390 Microwave waveguides and antennas
Flanges
Short circuit

/

/
/

4

A
4

4

Flanges

B

C
19-14 Choke joint.

Rotating joints are used in cases where the antenna has to point in different
directions at different times. Perhaps the most common example of such an application is the radar antenna.
The simplest form of rotating joint is shown in Fig. 19-15. The key to its operation is that the selected mode is symmetrical about the rotating axis. For this reason,
a circular waveguide operating in the TM01 mode is selected. In this rotating choke
joint, the actual waveguide rotates but the internal fields do not (thereby minimizing
reflections). Because most waveguide is rectangular, however, a somewhat more
complex system is needed. Figure 19-16 shows a rotating joint consisting of two circular waveguide sections inserted between segments of rectangular waveguide. On
each end of the joint, there is a rectangular-to-circular transition section.
In Fig. 19-16, the rectangular input waveguide operates in the TE10 mode that is
most efficient for rectangular waveguide. The E-field lines of force couple with the
circular segment, thereby setting up a TM01 mode wave. The TM01 mode has the required symmetry to permit coupling across the junction, where it meets another
transition zone and is reconverted to TE10 mode.

Waveguide coupling methods
Except possibly for the case where an oscillator exists inside a waveguide, it is necessary to have some form of input or output coupling in a waveguide system. There
are three basic types of coupling used in a microwave waveguide: capacitive (or
probe), inductive (or loop), and aperture (or slot).
Capacitive coupling is shown in Fig. 19-17. This type of coupling uses a vertical
radiator inserted into one end of the waveguide. Typically, the probe is a quarter-

Chap19_Carr

4/10/01

3:39 PM

Page 391

Waveguide coupling methods 391
wavelength in a fixed-frequency system. The probe is analogous to the vertical antennas used at lower frequencies. A characteristic of this type of radiator is that the
E field is parallel to the waveguide top and bottom surfaces. This arrangement satisfies the first boundary condition for the dominant TE10 mode.
The radiator is placed at a point that is a quarter-wavelength from the rear
wall (Fig. 19-17B). By traversing the quarter-wave distance (90° phase shift), being reflected from the rear wall (180° phase shift), and then retraversing the

Choke joint
Rotating
section

Stationary section

Rotating joint
19-15 Basic rotating joint.
TE10 Mode

Choke
joint

19-16
Representative practical rotating
joint.
Rotating
Stationary

TM 01
Mode
TE10 Mode

Chap19_Carr

4/10/01

3:39 PM

Page 392

392 Microwave waveguides and antennas
A
B
/

Rectangular
waveguide

4

C
19-17
Probe (capacitive) coupling.

D
Large diameter
probe
Low power
Large diameter
small diameter
High power
Broadband probes

quarter-wavelength distance (another 90° phase shift), the wave undergoes a total phase shift of one complete cycle, or 360°. Thus, the reflected wave arrives
back at the radiator in phase to reinforce the outgoing wave. Hence, none of the
excitation energy is lost.
Some waveguides have an adjustable end cap (Fig. 19-17C) in order to accommodate multiple frequencies. The end cap position is varied to accommodate the different wavelength signals.
Figure 19-17D shows high- and low-power broadband probes that are typically
not a quarter-wavelength except at one particular frequency. Broadbanding is accomplished by attention to the diameter-to-length ratio. The degree of coupling can
be varied in any of several ways: the length of the probe can be varied; the position
of the probe in the E field can be changed; or shielding can be used to partially
shade the radiator element.
Inductive, or loop coupling, is shown in Fig. 19-18. A small loop of wire (or other
conductor) is placed such that the number of magnetic flux lines is maximized. This
form of coupling is popular on microwave receiver antennas, in order to make a
waveguide-to-coaxial cable transition. In some cases, the loop is formed by the pigtail lead of a detector diode that, when combined with a local oscillator, downconverts the microwave signal to an IF frequency in the 30- to 300-MHz region.
Aperture, or slot coupling, is shown in Fig. 19-19. This type of coupling is used
to couple together two sections of waveguide, as on an antenna feed system. Slots

Chap19_Carr

4/10/01

3:39 PM

Page 393

Waveguide coupling methods 393
can be designed to couple either electric, magnetic, or electromagnetic fields. In
Fig. 19-19, slot A is placed at a point where the E field peaks, so it allows electrical
field coupling. Similarly, slot B is at a point where the H field peaks, so it allows
magnetic field coupling. Finally, we see slot C, which allows electromagnetic field
coupling.
Slots can also be characterized according to whether they are radiating or nonradiating. A nonradiating slot is cut at a point that does not interrupt the flow
of currents in the waveguide walls. The radiating slot, on the other hand, does interrupt currents flowing in the walls. A radiating slot is the basis for several forms of
antenna, which are discussed at the end of this chapter.

Coaxial cable
Loop

H-lines

Loop

19-18
Loop (inductive) coupling.

Waveguide
H-field
Possible location
for loop

A

C
B

19-19 Slot coupling.

Chap19_Carr

4/10/01

3:39 PM

Page 394

394 Microwave waveguides and antennas

Microwave antennas
Antennas are used in communications and radar systems at frequencies from the
very lowest to the very highest. In both theory and practice, antennas are used until
frequencies reach infrared and visible light, at which point optics becomes more important. Microwaves are a transition region between ordinary “radio waves” and “optical waves,” so (as might be expected) microwave technology makes use of
techniques from both worlds. For example, both dipoles and parabolic reflectors are
used in microwave systems.
The purpose of an antenna is to act as a transducer between either electrical
oscillations or propagated “guided waves” (i.e., in transmission lines or waveguides)
and a propagating electromagnetic wave in free space. A principal function of the antenna is to act as an impedance matcher between the waveguide, or transmission
line, impedance and the impedance of free space.
Antennas can be used equally well for both receiving and transmitting signals
because they obey the law of reciprocity. That is, the same antenna can be used to
both receive and transmit with equal success. Although there might be practical or
mechanical reasons to prefer specific antennas for one or the other mode, electrically they are the same.
In the transmit mode, the antenna must radiate electromagnetic energy. For this
job, the important property is gain G. In the receive mode, the job of the antenna is
to gather energy from impinging electromagnetic waves in free space. The important
property for receiver antennas is the effective aperture Ae, which is a function of the
antenna’s physical area. Because of reciprocity, a large gain usually infers a large effective aperture and vice versa. Effective aperture is defined as the area of the impinging radio wavefront that contains the same power as is delivered to a matched
resistive load across the feedpoint terminals.

The isotropic “antenna”
Antenna definitions and specifications can become useless unless a means is provided for putting everything on a common footing. Although a variety of systems exist for describing antenna behavior, the most common system compares a specific
antenna with a theoretical construct, called the isotropic radiator.
An isotropic radiator is a spherical point source that radiates equally well in all
directions. By definition, the directivity of the isotropic antenna is unity (1), and
all antenna gains are measured against this standard. Because the geometry of the
sphere and the physics of radiation are well known, we can calculate field strength
and power density at any point. These figures can then be compared with the actual
values from an antenna being tested. From spherical geometry, we can calculate
isotropic power density at any distance R from the point source:
P
Pd  
4πR2

[19.19]

Chap19_Carr

4/10/01

3:39 PM

Page 395

The isotropic “antenna”

395

where
Pd is the power density, in watts per square meter
P is the power in watts input to the isotropic radiator
R is the radius in meters at which point power density is measured
Example 19-5 Calculate the power density at a distance of 1 km (1000 m)
from a 1000-W isotropic source.
Solution:
P
Pd  
4πR2
(1000 W)
 
4π (1000 m)2
 7.95  105 W/m2
The rest of this chapter covers antenna gains and directivities that are relative
to isotropic radiators.

Near field and far field
Antennas are defined in terms of gain and directivity, both of which are measured
by looking at the radiated field of the antenna. There are two fields to consider: near
field and far field. The patterns published for an antenna tend to reflect far-field
performance. The far field for most antennas falls off according to the inverse
square law. That is, the intensity falls off according to the square of the distance
(1/R2), as in Eq. 19.19.
The near field of the antenna contains more energy than the far field because of
the electric and magnetic fields close to the antenna radiator element. The near field
tends to diminish rapidly according to a 1/R4 function. The minimum distance to the
edge of the near field is a function of both the wavelength of the radiated signals and
the antenna dimensions:
2 d2
rmin = 


[19.20]

where
rmin is the near-field distance
d is the largest antenna dimension
 is the wavelength of the radiated signal (all factors in the same units)
Example 19-6 An antenna with a length of 6 cm radiates a 12-cm wavelength
signal. Calculate the near-field distance.

Chap19_Carr

4/10/01

3:39 PM

Page 396

396 Microwave waveguides and antennas
Solution:
2d2
rmin  

(2) (6 cm)2
 
12 cm
72
   6 cm
12

Antenna impedance
Impedance represents the total opposition to the flow of alternating current
(e.g., RF), and includes both resistive and reactive components. The reactive components can be either capacitive or inductive, or a combination of both. Impedance
can be expressed in either of two notations:
Z  R
2X
(

X
)2
L
c

[19.21]

Z  R ± jX

[19.22]

or

Of these, Eq. 19.22 is perhaps the more commonly used in RF applications. The
reactive part of antenna impedance results from the magnetic and electrical fields
(close to the radiator) returning energy to the antenna radiator during every cycle.
The resistive part of impedance consists of two elements: ohmic losses Ro and radiation resistance Rr. The ohmic losses are due to heating of the antenna conductor elements by RF current passing through, as when current passes through any
conductor.
The radiation resistance relates to the radiated energy. An efficiency factor k
compares the loss and radiation resistances:
Rr
k
Rr Ro

[19.23]

The goal of the antenna designer is to reduce Ro to a minimum. The value of Rr
is set by the antenna design and installation, and is defined as the quotient of the
voltage over the current at the feedpoint, less losses.

Dipole antenna elements
The dipole is a two-pole antenna (Fig. 19-20) that can be modeled as either a single
radiator fed at the center (Fig. 19-20A) or a pair of radiators fed back to back
(Fig. 19-20B). RF current from the source oscillates back and forth in the radiator element, causing an electromagnetic wave to propagate in a direction perpendicular
to the radiator element. The polarity of any electromagnetic field is the direction
of the electrical field vector (see Chap. 2). In the dipole, the polarization is parallel
to the radiator element: a horizontal element produces a horizontally polarized signal, while a vertical element produces a vertically polarized signal.

3:39 PM

Page 397

The isotropic “antenna”

397

Generator
V

Current

4/10/01

Radiator

Chap19_Carr

V = c = 3108 m/s

19-20A Basic dipole antenna showing propagation.

19-20B Basic dipole antenna.

Figure 19-21 shows the radiator patterns for the dipole viewed from two perspectives. Figure 19-21A shows the pattern of a horizontal half-wavelength dipole as
viewed from above. This plot shows the directivity of the dipole: maximum radiation
is found in two lobes perpendicular to the radiator length. The plot in Fig. 19-21B
shows the end-on pattern of the dipole. This omnidirectional pattern serves for a
vertically polarized dipole viewed from above. The end-on pattern of a horizontal dipole would be similar, except that it is distorted by ground effects unless the antenna
is a very large number of wavelengths above the ground.

Chap19_Carr

4/10/01

3:39 PM

Page 398

398 Microwave waveguides and antennas

Dipole
19-21A
Dipole pattern (horizontal).

Dipole
19-21B
Dipole pattern (vertical).

A microwave dipole is shown in Fig. 19-22. The antenna radiator element consists of a short conductor at the end of a section of waveguide. Although most lowfrequency dipoles are a half-wavelength, microwave dipoles might be either a
half-wavelength, less than a half-wavelength, or greater than a half-wavelength, depending upon application. For example, because most microwave dipoles are used to
illuminate a reflector antenna of some sort, the length of the dipole depends upon
the exact illumination function required for proper operation of the reflector. Most,
however, will be a half-wavelength.

Antenna directivity and gain
The dipole discussed illustrated a fundamental property of the type of antenna generally used at microwave frequencies: directivity and gain. These two concepts are
different but so interrelated that they are usually discussed at the same time. Because of the directivity, the antenna focuses energy in only two directions, which

Chap19_Carr

4/10/01

3:39 PM

Page 399

The isotropic “antenna”

399

means that all of the energy is found in those directions (Fig. 19-21A), rather than
being distributed over a spherical surface. Thus, the dipole has a gain approximately
2.1 dB greater than isotropic. In other words, the measured power density at any
point will be 2.1 dB higher than the calculated isotropic power density for the same
RF input power to the antenna.
Directivity The directivity of an antenna is a measure of its ability to direct
RF energy in a limited direction, rather than in all (spherical) directions equally. As
shown in Fig. 19-21A, the horizontal directivity of the dipole forms a bidirectional
figure-8 pattern. Two methods for showing unidirectional antenna patterns are
shown in Fig. 19-23. The method of Fig. 19-23A is a polar plot viewed from above.
The main lobe is centered on 0°. The plot of Fig. 19-23B is a rectangular method for
displaying the same information. This pattern follows a (sin x)/x function or,
for power, [(sin x)/x]2.
Directivity D is a measure of relative power densities:
Pmax
D
Pav

[19.24]

4π
D


[19.25]

Or, referenced to isotropic,

where
D is the directivity
Pmax is the maximum power
Pav is the average power
 is the solid angle subtended by the main lobe

19-22
Microwave dipole radiator.

Dipole

Waveguide

Chap19_Carr

4/10/01

3:39 PM

Page 400

400 Microwave waveguides and antennas

0-Degrees

3 dB BW

Main lobe

19-23A
Directional antenna pattern (top
view).

a

Sidelobe

Backlobe
a = 3-dB beamwidth

The term  is a solid angle, which emphasizes the fact that antenna patterns
must be examined in at least two extents: horizontal and vertical.
A common method for specifying antenna directivity is beamwidth (BW). The
definition of BW is the angular displacement between points on the main lobe (see
Figs. 19-23A and 19-23B), where the power density drops to one-half (3 dB) of its
maximum main lobe power density. This angle is shown in Fig. 19-23A as a.
In an ideal antenna system, 100 percent of the radiated power is in the main
lobe, and there are no other lobes. But in real antennas certain design and installation anomalies cause additional minor lobes, such as the sidelobes and backlobe
shown in Fig. 19-23A. Several problems derive from the minor lobes. First is the loss
of usable power. For a given power density required at a distant receiver site, the
transmitter must supply whatever additional power is needed to make up for the minor lobe losses.
The second problem is intersystem interference. A major application of directional antennas is the prevention of mutual interference between nearby cochan-

Chap19_Carr

4/10/01

3:39 PM

Page 401

The isotropic “antenna”

401

nel stations. In radar systems, high sidelobes translate to errors in detected targets. If, for example, a sidelobe is large enough to detect a target, then the radar
display will show this off-axis target as if it was in the main lobe of the antenna.
The result is an azimuth error that could be important in terms of marine and aeronautical navigation.
Gain Antenna gain derives from the fact that energy is squeezed into a limited
space instead of being distributed over a spherical surface. The term gain implies
that the antenna creates a higher power when, in fact, it merely concentrates the
power into a single direction that would otherwise be spread out over a larger area.
Even so, it is possible to speak of an apparent increase in power. Antenna-transmitter
systems are often rated in terms of effective radiated power (ERP). The ERP is the
product of the transmitter power and the antenna gain. For example, if an antenna
has a gain of 3 dB, the ERP will be twice the transmitter output power. In other
words, a 100-W output transmitter connected to a 3-dB antenna will produce a
power density at a distant receiver equal to a 200-W transmitter feeding an isotropic
radiator. There are two interrelated gains to be considered: directivity gain Gd and
power gain Gp.
The directivity gain is defined as the quotient of the maximum radiation intensity over the average radiation intensity (note the similarity to the directivity definition). This measure of gain is based on the shape of the antenna radiation pattern,
and can be calculated with respect to an isotropic radiator (D1) from:
4π Pa
Gd  
Pr
3 dB BW

Main lobe

Sidelobes

0

a
19-23B Graphically presented pattern.

[19.26]

Chap19_Carr

4/10/01

3:39 PM

Page 402

402 Microwave waveguides and antennas
where
Gd is the directivity gain
Pa is the maximum power radiated per unit of solid angle
Pr is the total power radiated by the antenna
The power gain is similar in nature, but slightly different from directivity gain; it
includes dissipative losses in the antenna. Not included in the power gain are losses
caused by cross-polarization or impedance mismatch between the waveguide (or
transmission line) and the antenna. There are two commonly used means for determining power gain:
4πPa
Gp  
Pn

[19.27]

Pai
Gp  
Pi

[19.28]

and

where
Pa is the maximum radiated per unit solid angle
Pn is the net power accepted by the antenna (i.e., less mismatch losses)
Pai is the average intensity at a distant point
Pi is the intensity at the same point from an isotropic radiator fed the same RF
power level as the antenna
(Equations assume equal power to antenna and comparison isotropic source.)
Provided that ohmic losses are kept negligible, the relationship between directivity gain and power gain is given by:
PrGd
Gp  
Pn

[19.29]

(All terms as previously defined.)
Relationship of gain and aperture Antennas obey the law of reciprocity,
which means that any given antenna will work as well to receive as to transmit. The
function of the receiver antenna is to gather energy from the electromagnetic field
radiated by the transmitter antenna. The aperture is related to, and often closely approximates, the physical area of the antenna. But in some designs the effective aperture Ae is less than the physical area A, so there is an effectiveness factor n that must
be applied. In general, however, a high-gain transmitter antenna also exhibits a high
receiving aperture, and the relationship can be expressed as
4 πAen
G  
2

[19.30]

Chap19_Carr

4/10/01

3:39 PM

Page 403

The isotropic “antenna”

403

where
Ae is the effective aperture
n is the aperture effectiveness (n1 for a perfect, lossless antenna)
 is the wavelength of the signal

Horn antenna radiators
The horn radiator is a tapered termination of a length of waveguide (see Fig. 19-24
(A-C) that provides the impedance transformation between the waveguide impedance and the free-space impedance. Horn radiators are used both as antennas in
their own right, and as illuminators for reflector antennas. Horn antennas are not a
perfect match to the waveguide, although standing wave ratios of 1.5:1 or less are
achievable. The gain of a horn radiator is proportional to the area A of the flared
open flange (A  ab in Fig. 19-24B), and inversely proportional to the square of
the wavelength:
10A
G
2

[19.31]

where
A is the flange area
 is the wavelength (both in same units)
The 3-dB beamwidth for vertical and horizontal extents can be approximated
from:
Vertical
51
v  
b

degrees

[19.32]

b
a

Rectangular

Pyramidal

Conical

A

B

C

19-24 Horn radiators.

Chap19_Carr

4/10/01

3:39 PM

Page 404

404 Microwave waveguides and antennas
Horizontal
70
h  
a

degrees

[19.33]

where
v is the vertical beamwidth, in degrees
h is the horizontal beamwidth, in degrees
a, b are dimensions of the flared flange
 is the wavelength
A form of antenna, related to the horn, is the cavity antenna of Fig. 19-25. In this
type of antenna, a quarter-wavelength radiating element extends from the waveguide (or transmission line connector) into a resonant cavity. The radiator element
is placed a quarter-wavelength into a resonant cavity; and is spaced a quarterwavelength from the rear wall of the cavity. A tuning disk is used to alter cavity dimensions in order to provide a limited tuning range for the antenna. Gains to about
6 dB are possible with this arrangement.

Reflector antennas
At microwave frequencies, it becomes possible to use reflector antennas because of
the short wavelengths involved. Reflectors are theoretically possible at lower frequencies, but because of the longer wavelengths, the antennas would be so large
that they become impractical. Several forms of reflector are used (Figs. 19-26 and
19-27). In Fig. 19-26 we see the corner reflector antenna, which is used primarily in
the high-UHF and low-microwave region. A dipole element is placed at the “focal
point” of the corner reflector, so it receives (in phase) the reflected wavefronts from
the surface. Either solid metallic reflector surfaces or wire mesh may be used. When
mesh is used, however, the holes in the mesh must be 1⁄12-wavelength or smaller.
Figure 19-27 shows several other forms of reflector surface shape, most of which
are used in assorted radar applications.

Parabolic “dish” antennas
The parabolic reflector antenna is one of the most widespread of all the microwave
antennas, and is the type that normally comes to mind when thinking of microwave
systems. This type of antenna derives its operation from physics similar to optics,
and is possible because microwaves are in a transition region between ordinary radio
waves and infrared/visible light.
The dish antenna has a paraboloid shape as defined by Fig. 19-28. In this figure,
the dish surface is positioned such that the center is at the origin (0,0) of an x-y coordinate system. For purposes of defining the surface, we place a second vertical
axis called the directrix (y´ ) a distance behind the surface equal to the focal length
(u). The paraboloid surface follows the function y2  4ux, and has the property that
a line from the focal point F to any point on the surface is the same length as a line
from that same point to the directrix (in other words, MN  MF).
If a radiator element is placed at the focal point F, then it will illuminate the
reflector surface, causing wavefronts to be propagated away from the surface in

Chap19_Carr

4/10/01

3:39 PM

Page 405

The isotropic “antenna”

Microwave
window

Antenna radiator
element

/
4

/

405

(Cavity)



Tuning disk

4

Tuning adjustment
screw

Waveguide or
coaxial cable
fitting

19-25 Cavity antenna.



19-26
Corner reflector.

Dipole
element
aR

aI

phase. Similarly, wavefronts, intercepted by the reflector surface, are reflected to
the focal point.
Gain The gain of a parabolic antenna is a function of several factors: dish diameter, feed illumination, and surface accuracy. The dish diameter D should be large
compared with its depth. Surface accuracy refers to the degree of surface irregularities. For commercial antennas, 1⁄8-wavelength surface accuracy is usually sufficient,

Chap19_Carr

4/10/01

3:39 PM

Page 406

406 Microwave waveguides and antennas

A. Paraboloid

B. Truncated

C. Truncated

D. Orange-peel

paraboloid
(surface
search)

paraboloid
(height
finding)

paraboloid

E. Cylindrical
paraboloid

F. Corner
reflector
19-27 Reflector antennas.

although on certain radar antennas the surface accuracy specification must be
tighter.
The feed illumination refers to how evenly the feed element radiates to the reflector surface. For circular parabolic dishes, a circular waveguide feed produces optimum illumination, and rectangular waveguides are less than optimum. The TE11
mode is desired. For best performance, the illumination should drop off evenly from
the center to the edge, with the edge being 210 dB down from the center. The diameter, length, and beamwidth of the radiator element (or horn) must be optimized for
the specific F/d ratio of the dish. The cutoff frequency is approximated from
175,698
fcutoff  
dmm

[19.34]

where
fcutoff is the cutoff frequency
d is the inside diameter of the circular feedhorn
The gain of the parabolic dish antenna is found from
k (πD)2
G  
2
where
G is the gain over isotropic
D is the diameter
 is the wavelength (same units as D)
k is the reflection efficiency (0.4 to 0.7, with 0.55 being most common)

[19.35]

4/10/01

3:39 PM

Page 407

The isotropic “antenna”

407

The 3-dB beamwidth of the parabolic dish antenna is approximated by
70 
BW  
D

[19.36]

D2
F
16d

[19.37]

and the focal length by

For receiving applications, the effective aperture is the relevant specification
and is found from
Ae  kπ(D/2)2

[19.38]

The antenna pattern radiated by the antenna is similar to Fig. 19-23B. With horn
illumination, the sidelobes tend to be 23 to 28 dB below the main lobe, or 10 to 15 dB
below isotropic. It is found that 50 percent of the energy radiated by the parabolic
dish is within the 3-dB beamwidth, and 90 percent is between the first nulls on either side of the main lobe.
Parabolic (y2  ux)
reflector surface
y

y1
B

M

N

u

u
(0,0)

F
(Focal point)

x

A
19-28 Ray tracing shows operation of parabolic antenna.

Advancing
wavefronts

MN  MF

Directrix

Chap19_Carr

D

Chap19_Carr

4/10/01

3:39 PM

Page 408

408 Microwave waveguides and antennas
If a dipole element is used for the feed device, then a splash plate is placed
⁄4-wavelength behind the dipole in order to improve illumination. The splash plate
must be several wavelengths in diameter, and is used to reflect the backlobe back
toward the reflector surface. When added to the half-wave phase reversal inherent in the reflection process, the two-way quarter-wavelength adds another halfwavelength and thereby permits the backwave to move out in phase with the front
lobe wave.
Parabolic dish feed geometries Figure 19-29 shows two methods for feeding parabolic dish antennas, regardless of which form of radiator (horn, dipole, etc.)
is used. In Fig. 19-29A we see the method in which the radiator element is placed at
the focal point, and a waveguide (or transmission line) is routed to it. This method
is used in low-cost installations such as home satellite TV receive-only (TVRO)
antennas.
Figure 19-29B shows the Cassegrain feed system. This system is modeled after
the Cassegrain optical telescope. The radiator element is placed at an opening at the
center of the dish. A hyperbolic subreflector is placed at the focal point, and it is
used to reflect the wavefronts to the radiator element. The Cassegrain system results in lower-noise operation because of several factors: less transmission line
length, lower sidelobes, and the fact that the open horn sees sky instead of earth

1

Reflector

Primary feed horn

19-29A
Parabolic antenna conventional
feed.
Waveguide or
transmission
line

Chap19_Carr

4/10/01

3:39 PM

Page 409

The isotropic “antenna”

409

Main
reflector

Primary
feed horn
Subreflector

Incoming
wavefront

Waveguide

19-29B Parabolic antenna Cassegrain feed.

(which has lower temperature); on the negative side, galactic and solar noise might
be slightly higher on a Cassegrain dish.
Figure 19-30A shows the monopulse feed geometry. In this system, a pair of radiator elements are placed at the focal point, and fed to a power splitter network that
outputs both sum and difference signals (Fig. 19-30B). When these are combined,
the resultant beam shape has improved 3-dB beamwidth as a result of the algebraic summation of the two.

Array antennas
When antenna radiators are arranged in a precision array, an increase in gain occurs.
An array might be a series of dipole elements, as in the broadside array of Fig. 19-31
(which is used in the UHF region), or a series of slots, horns, or other radiators. The
overall gain of an array antenna is proportional to the number of elements, as well as
the details of their spacing. In this, and other antennas, a method of phase shifting
is needed. In Fig. 19-31, the phase shifting is caused by the crossed feeding of the elements, but in more modern arrays, other forms of phase shifter are used.
Two methods of feeding an array are shown in Fig. 19-32. The corporate feed
method connects all elements, and their phase shifters, in parallel with the source.
The branch feed method breaks the waveguide network into two (or more) separate
paths.
Solid-state array antennas Some modern radar sets use solid-state array antennas consisting of a large number of elements, each of which is capable of shifting
the phase of a microwave input signal. Two forms are known: passive (Fig. 19-33A)
and active (Fig. 19-33B). In the passive type of element, a ferrite (or PIN diode)
phase shifter is placed in the transmission path between the RF input and the radiator element (usually a slot). By changing the phase of the RF signal selectively, it is
possible to form and steer the beam at will. A 3-bit (i.e., three discrete state) phase

Chap19_Carr

4/10/01

3:40 PM

Page 410

410 Microwave waveguides and antennas

F1

Sum
19-30A
Monopulse feed.
Difference

F2

3 dB BW

3 dB BW

Difference

Sum

3-dB BW

3-dB BW

19-30B
Monopulse patterns.

Improved

Chap19_Carr

4/10/01

3:40 PM

Page 411

The isotropic “antenna”

411


3

2
Wire mesh
reflecting
screen
Half-wave
dipole
elements

19-31
Reflector array antenna.

shifter allows the phase to shift in 45° increments, while a 4-bit phase shifter allows
22.5° increments of phase shift.
The active element contains, in addition to a phase shifter, a transmit power amplifier (1 or 2 W) and a low-noise amplifier (LNA) for receiving. A pair of transmit/
receive (T/R) switches select the path to which the RF signal is directed. The total
output power of this antenna is the sum of all output powers from all elements in the
array. For example, an array of one thousand 2-W elements makes a 2000-W system.

Slot array antennas
A resonant slot (cut into a wall of a section of waveguide) is somewhat analogous, if
not identical, to a dipole. By cutting several slots in the waveguide, we obtain the advantages of an array antenna in which the elements are several slot radiators. Slot array antennas are used for marine navigation radars, telemetry systems, and the
reception of microwave television signals in the Multipoint Distribution Service
(MDS) on 2.145 GHz.
Figure 19-34 shows a simple slot antenna used in telemetry applications. A slotted section of rectangular waveguide is mounted to a right-angle waveguide flange.
An internal wedge (not shown) is placed at the top of the waveguide and serves as a
matching-impedance termination to prevent internal reflected waves. Directivity is
enhanced by attaching flanges to the slotted section of waveguide parallel to the direction of propagation (see end view of Fig. 19-34).
Figure 19-35 shows two forms of flatplate array antennas constructed from
slotted waveguide radiator elements (shown as insets). Figure 19-35A shows the
rectangular array, and Fig. 19-35B shows the circular array. These flatplate arrays
are used extensively in microwave communications and radar applications.
The feed structure for a flatplate array is shown in Fig. 19-35C. The antenna element is the same sort as shown in Figs. 19-35A and 19-35B. A distribution waveguide is physically mated with the element, and a coupling slot is provided between
the two waveguides. Energy propagating in the distribution system waveguide is

Chap19_Carr

4/10/01

3:40 PM

Page 412

412 Microwave waveguides and antennas

Branch
feed

{
RF Microwave
generators

Antenna
elements

Corporate
feed

Phase shifters

{
19-32 Branch feed and corporate feed.
Binary
control
inputs

RF input

PIN diode
or ferrite
phase shifter
19-33A Phase shifter.

Radiator
element

Chap19_Carr

4/10/01

3:40 PM

Page 413

Microwave antenna safety note 413
Binary
control
inputs
PA

RF port

PIN diode or
ferrite
phase shifter

T/R

T/R

ANT.

LNA

19-33B Phase-shift T/R element.

Right-angle
waveguide
feed flange

Directivity
flanges
(Front view)
End
view

Slots

Waveguide

19-34 Slot antenna (front view).

coupled into the antenna radiator element through this slot. In some cases metallic
or dielectric phase-shifting stubs are also used in order to fine-tune the antenna radiation pattern.

Microwave antenna safety note
Microwave RF energy is dangerous to your health. Anything that can cook a roast
beef can also cook you! The U.S. government sets a safety limit for microwave exposure of 10 mW/cm2 averaged over 6 minutes; some other countries use a level
one-tenth of the U.S. standard. The principal problem is tissue heating, and eyes
seem especially sensitive to microwave energy. Some authorities believe that
cataracts form from prolonged exposure. Some authorities also believe that genetic
damage to offspring is possible as well as other long-term effects as a result of cumulative exposure.
Because of their relatively high gain, microwave antennas can produce hazardous
field strengths in close proximity—even at relatively low RF input power levels. At

Chap19_Carr

4/10/01

3:40 PM

Page 414

414 Microwave waveguides and antennas

19-35A Flatplate slot array.

19-35B
Flatplate antenna.

Chap19_Carr

4/10/01

3:40 PM

Page 415

Microwave antenna safety note 415

Coupling
slot

Antenna
element

Distribution
system
RF
input
19-35C Flatplate antenna feed coupling.

least one technician in a TV satellite earth station suffered abdominal adhesions, solid
matter in the urine, and genital dysfunction after servicing a 45-m-diameter 3.5-GHz
antenna with RF power applied.
Be very careful around microwave antennas. Do not service a radiating antenna. When servicing nonradiating antennas, be sure to stow them in a position
that prevents the inadvertent exposure of humans, should power accidentally be
applied. A Radiation Hazard sign should be prominently displayed on the antenna. Good design practice requires an interlock system that prevents radiation in
such situations. “Hot” transmitter service should be performed with a shielded
dummy load replacing the antenna.

This page intentionally left blank

20

CHAPTER

Antenna noise
temperature
RADIO RECEPTION IS ESSENTIALLY A MATTER OF SIGNAL-TO-NOISE RATIO (SNR). SIGNALS
must be some amplitude above the noise floor of the system in order to be received
properly. All electronic systems (receivers and antennas included) have inherent
noise, even if there is no power flowing in them. One of the goals of the antenna
designer is to minimize the noise so that weak signals are not obscured. One of the
basic forms of noise seen in systems is the thermal noise. Even if the amplifiers in
the receiver add no additional noise (they will!), there will be thermal noise at the input.
If you replace the antenna with a resistor matched to the system impedance that is
totally shielded, there will still be noise present. The noise is produced by the random
motion of electrons inside the resistor. At all temperatures above absolute zero (about
273.16°C) the electrons in the resistor material are in random motion. At any given instant there will be a huge number of electrons in motion in all directions. The reason
why there is no discernible current flow in one direction is that the motions cancel each
other out even over short time periods. The noise power present in a resistor is:
PN  KTBR

[20.1]

where
PN is the noise power, in watts
T is the temperature, in kelvins (K)
K is Boltzmann’s constant (1.38  1023 K)
B is the bandwidth, in hertz
R is the resistance, in ohms
Note: By international agreement T is set to 290 K.
Consider a receiver with a 1-MHz bandwidth and an input resistance of 50 Ω. The
noise power is (1.38  1023 K)  (290 K)  (1,000,000 Hz)  (50 Ω)  2  1013 W.
This noise is called thermal noise, thermal agitation noise, or Johnson noise.
A resonant antenna can be modeled as an impedance consisting solely of a resistor with a value equal to the feedpoint impedance. If an antenna has a 50-Ω feedpoint
Copyright 2001 - the McGraw-Hill Companies

417

Chap20_Carr

4/10/01

3:43 PM

Page 418

418 Antenna noise temperature
impedance, then it will generate exactly the same amount of thermal noise as a resistor of the same value.

Noise factor, noise figure, and noise temperature
The noise performance of a receiving system can be defined in three different, but
related, ways: noise factor Fn, noise figure (NF), and equivalent noise temperature Te; these properties are definable as a simple ratio, decibel ratio, or kelvin temperature, respectively.

Noise factor (Fn)
For components such as resistors, the noise factor is the ratio of the noise produced
by a real resistor to the simple thermal noise of an ideal resistor. The noise factor of
a radio receiver (or any system) is the ratio of output noise power Pno to input noise
power Pni:
Pno
Fn  
[20.2]
Pni T290 K



In order to make comparisons easier, the noise factor is usually measured at the
standard temperature (To) of 290 K (standardized room temperature), although in
some countries 299 K or 300 K is commonly used (the differences are negligible).
It is also possible to define noise factor Fn in terms of output and input signal-tonoise ratios:
Sni
[20.3]
Fn  
Sno
where
Sni is the input signal-to-noise ratio
Sno is the output signal-to-noise ratio

Noise figure (NF)
The noise figure is a frequently used measure of a receiver’s “goodness,” or its departure from “idealness.” Thus, it is a figure of merit. The noise figure is the noise
factor converted to decibel notation:
NF  10 log Fn

[20.4]

where
NF is the noise figure, in decibels
Fn is the noise factor
LOG refers to the system of base 10 logarithms

Noise temperature (Te)
The noise “temperature” is a means for specifying noise in terms of an equivalent
temperature. Evaluating the noise equations shows that the noise power is directly

Chap20_Carr

4/10/01

3:43 PM

Page 419

Noise factor, noise figure, and noise temperature 419
proportional to temperature in kelvins, and also that noise power collapses to zero at
the temperature of absolute zero (0 K).
Note that the equivalent noise temperature Te is not the physical temperature
of the amplifier, but rather a theoretical construct that is an equivalent temperature that produces that amount of noise power. The noise temperature is related to
the noise factor by
Te  (Fn1) To

[20.5]

 

[20.6]

and to noise figure by
NF
Te  KTo log1  1
10

Noise temperature is often specified for receivers and amplifiers in combination
with, or in lieu of, the noise figure. The noise temperature concept is also applied to
antennas where it is related to the amount of thermal noise generated by the resistive component of the antenna feedpoint impedance.
The antenna-receiver system will be afflicted by three different noise sources
external to the receiver. The first is the thermal noise temperature of the feedpoint
impedance (TR). The sky exhibits a noise temperature that depends on where the
antenna main lobe is pointed. Similarly, the ground has a noise temperature that
consists of components reflected from the sky as well as components of its own
caused by whatever thermal agitation exists. In a typical system (Fig. 20-1) the

20-1 Contributors to antenna noise temperature.

Chap20_Carr

4/10/01

3:43 PM

Page 420

420 Antenna noise temperature
main lobe will be pointed toward the sky noise source, while the sidelobes will pick
up noise from the ground. The total noise temperature of the antenna is
TANT  (M  TSKY)

" (1  M)TGND

TR

[20.7]

where
TANT is the equivalent noise temperature of the antenna
TSKY is the noise temperature of the sky
TGND is the noise temperature of the ground
TR is the feedpoint resistance noise temperature
M is the fraction of the total energy that enters the main lobe
" is the fraction of sidelobes that are viewing the ground (only one of several
sidelobes is shown in Fig. 20-1)

21

CHAPTER

Antennas for radio
astronomy
FOR CENTURIES ASTRONOMERS HAVE SCANNED THE HEAVENS WITH OPTICAL TELESCOPES.
But today, astronomers have many more tools in their bag, and one of them is radio
astronomy. The field of radio astronomy emerged in the 1930s and 1940s through the
work of Grote Reber and Carl Jansky. Even during World War II, progress was made
as many tens of thousands of operators were listening to frequencies from dc to near
daylight (well, actually, the low-end microwave bands). British radar operators noted
during the Battle of Britain that the distance at which they could detect German aircraft dropped when the Milky Way was above the horizon.
Although there is a lot of amateur radio astronomy being done, most of it requires microwave equipment with low-noise front ends. However, there are several
things that almost anyone can do.
The topic of antennas for radio astronomy can include nearly all forms of directional gain antenna. It is common to see Yagis, ring Yagis, cubical quads, and other antennas for lower-frequency use (18 to 1200 MHz). Microwave gain antennas can be
used for higher frequencies. Indeed, many amateur radio astronomers appropriate TV
receive-only (TVRO) satellite dish antennas for astronomy work. In this chapter we will
cover some antennas that are not found in other chapters, at least not in this present
context.

Jupiter reception
Jupiter is a strong radio source (next to the sun, it’s the strongest in the sky). It produces noiselike signals over the spectrum 5 to 40 MHz, with peaks between 18 and
24 MHz. One source claims that the radio signals come from massive storms on the
largest planet’s surface, apparently triggered by the transit of the jovian moons
through the planet’s magnetic field. The signals are plainly audible on the HF band
any time Jupiter is above the horizon, day or night. However, in order to eliminate
the possibility of both local and terrestrial skip signals from interfering, Jupiter DXers prefer to listen during the hours after 2100 [or whenever the maximum usable
frequency (MUF) drops significantly below 18 MHz] and local sunup. Listen to the
Copyright 2001 - the McGraw-Hill Companies

421

Chap21_Carr

4/10/01

3:57 PM

Page 422

422 Antennas for radio astronomy
amateur 17- or 15-m bands. If you hear zilch activity, then it’s a good bet that the
MUF has dropped enough to make listening worthwhile. Even during the day, however, it is possible to hear jovian signals, but differentiating them from other signals
or solar noise is difficult.
So what do you need to DX Jupiter? It would help to have a decent radio receiver
that works well over the range 18 to 24 MHz. Some cheaper radio receivers are not
desirable, but most modern communications receivers are fine. The radio signals are
rising and falling “swooshing” noises. The chances of receiving a signal from Jupiter
are about 1 in 6, according to several radio astronomers.
The antenna can be a simple dipole cut for the middle of the 18- to 24-MHz band,
which happens to be a 15-m amateur radio band antenna. The antenna should be installed in the normal manner for any dipole, except that the wire must run east-west
in order to pick up the southerly rising planet.
Figure 21-1 shows a broadband dipole that covers the entire frequency region of
interest (18 to 24 MHz) by paralleling three different dipoles: one cut for 18 MHz,
one cut for 21 MHz, and one cut for 24 MHz. The dimensions are
A
B
C

19.5 ft
22.3 ft
26 ft

24 MHz
21 MHz
18 MHz

There are several approaches to making this type of antenna. One is to use
three-conductor wire, and cut the wires to the lengths indicated above. Another is to
use a homemade spacer to spread the wires apart.

Ring antenna
Another popular jovian radio antenna is the ring radiator, two versions of which are
shown in Fig. 21-2. This antenna is made of a 5-ft-diameter loop of 1⁄2-in-diameter softdrawn copper plumbing pipe. The single-ended version is shown in Fig. 21-2A. In this
antenna the loop is open-ended. The center conductor of the coaxial cable feedline is
connected to one end of the ring radiator, while the coax shield is connected to the
chicken wire ground plane. The balanced version (Fig. 21-2B) has an RF transformer
(T1) at the feedpoint.
The ring radiator antenna should have a bandpass preamplifier. The preamp is
needed because of the low pickup of this kind of antenna, and that preamp should
be mounted as close as possible to the antenna. The bandpass characteristic is obtained by filtering. The idea is to get rid of terrestrial signals in the adjacent bands.
The typical preamplifier is broadbanded (which is what we want), so will pick up
not only the desired signals but others as well (which is what we don’t want). Even
a 5-W CB transmitter a few blocks away can drive the preamplifier into saturation,
so it’s wise to eliminate the undesired signals before they get into the preamplifier.
In the case of the single-ended amplifier, a single-ended preamplifier is used. But
for the balanced version (Fig. 21-2B) a differential preamplifier is used.
The loop (both versions) is mounted about 7 or 8 in above a groundplane made of
chicken wire, metal window screen, copper sheeting, or copper foil. The copper sheeting

Chap21_Carr

4/10/01

3:57 PM

Page 423

Ring antenna 423

21-1 Wideband dipole such as might be used for Jupiter reception.

21-2A Ring radiator: single-ended.

Chap21_Carr

4/10/01

3:57 PM

Page 424

424 Antennas for radio astronomy

21-2B Ring radiator: balanced.

or foil is best, but costs a lot of money, and turns ugly green after a couple weeks in the elements. If you use screen, make sure that it is a metallic screen. Some window and porch
screening material is made of synthetic materials that are insulators.
Figure 21-3A is a mechanical side view of the ring radiator antenna, while Fig.
21-3B is a side view. The antenna is mounted above the screen with insulators. These
can be made of wood, plastic, or any other material. The frame holding the groundplane screen (Fig. 21-3B) can be made from 1  2-in lumber. Note that the frame has
interior crosspieces to support the antenna, as well as the outer perimeter. The
larger outer perimeter is needed because the screen groundplane should extend beyond the diameter of the radiator element by about 10 to 15 percent.

DDRR
The directional discontinuity ring radiator (DDRR) antenna is shown in Fig. 21-4A,
while a side view showing the mounting scheme is shown in Fig. 21-4B. It is typically

Chap21_Carr

4/10/01

3:57 PM

Page 425

DDRR 425

21-3 Ring radiator mounted over a ground screen.

Chap21_Carr

4/10/01

3:57 PM

Page 426

426 Antennas for radio astronomy

21-4A DDRR antenna.

21-4B DDRR antenna: side view.

mounted about 1 ft off the ground (H12 in). The DDRR consists of two sections,
one vertical and one horizontal. The short vertical section has a length equal to the
height H of the antenna above the ground. One end of the vertical segment is
grounded. The horizontal section is a loop with a diameter D.
The conductor diameter E is at least 0.5 in at 28 MHz, and 4 in at 4 MHz. Because
of the loop, some people call this the hula hoop antenna. One author recommends
using a 2-in automobile exhaust pipe bent into the correct shape by an auto muffler
dealer. The far end of the loop is connected to ground through a small-value tuning

Chap21_Carr

4/10/01

3:57 PM

Page 427

Helical antennas 427
capacitor C1. The actual value of C1 is found experimentally and is used to resonate
the antenna to a particular operating frequency.
The feedline of the DDRR antenna is coaxial cable connected such that the
shield is grounded at the bottom end of the vertical section. The center conductor is
connected to the ring radiator a distance F from the vertical section. The length F
is determined by the impedance that must be matched. The radiation resistance is
approximated by
2620H2

RT 
2

[21.1]

where
RT is the radiation resistance, in ohms
H is the height of the antenna off the ground
 is the wavelength
(Both H and  are in the same units.)
The approximate values for the various dimensions of the DDRR are given below
in general terms, with examples in Table 21-1:
D
H
F
E
G

0.078
0.11D
0.25H
0.5 to 4 in
See Table 21-1

Table 21-1. Examples of dimensions for DDRR
Band (MHz)
Dimension
G (in)
C1 (pF)
F (in)
H (in)
D (ft)
E (in)

1.8
16
150
12
48
36
5

4

7.5

15

22

30

50

7
100
6
24
18
4

5
75
6
11
9
2

3
35
1.5
6
4.5
1

2.5
15
1.5
4.75
3.33
0.75

2
12
1
3
2.33
0.75

1.5
10
1
1.5
1.4
0.5

150
1
6
0.5
1
6
0.25

The construction details of the DDRR are so similar to those of the ring radiator
that the same diagram can be used (see Fig. 21-3 again).
The normal attitude of the DDRR for communications is horizontal. However, for
Jupiter radio reception, the antenna groundplane screen can be tilted to
face Jupiter’s point in the sky.

Helical antennas
The helical antenna (Fig. 21-5) provides moderately wide bandwidth and circular
polarization. Because of the polarization some people find the helical antenna to be

Chap21_Carr

4/10/01

3:57 PM

Page 428

428 Antennas for radio astronomy
particularly well suited to radio astronomy reception. The antenna (of diameter D)
will have a circumference C of 0.75 to 1.3. The pitch of the helix (S) is the axial
length of one turn, while the overall length LNS (where N is the number of turns).
The ratio S/C should be 0.22 to 0.28. At least three turns are needed to produce
axial-mode main lobe maxima.
The diameter or edge of the groundplane G should be on the order of 0.8 to
1.1 if circular and/or square, respectively. The offset between the groundplane and
the first turn of the helix is 0.12.
The approximate gain of the helical antenna is found from
Gain  11.8 10 log (C2NS)

dBi

[21.2]

The pitch angle  and turn length  for the helical antenna are given by
πD
  tan1 
[21.3]
S

 

and
)
D2S
2
  (π

[21.4]

The beamwidth of the helical antenna is
K
#
NS


[21.5]

where
# is the beamwidth, in degrees
N is the number of turns
S is the pitch, in wavelengths
C is the circumference, in wavelengths
K is 52 for the 3-dB beamwidth and 115 for the beamwidth to the first null
in the pattern
The short section between the helix and the groundplane is terminated in a
coaxial connector, allowing the antenna to be fed from the rear of the groundplane.
The feedpoint impedance is approximately 140 Ω.

Multiple helical antennas
Stacking helical antennas allows a radiation pattern that is much cleaner than the
normal one-antenna radiation pattern. It also provides a good way to obtain high gain
with only a few turns in each helix. If two helixes are stacked, then the gain will be
the same as for an antenna that is twice the length of each element, while for four
stacked antennas the gain is the same as for a single antenna 4 times as long. Figure
21-6 shows a side view of the stacked helixes.
The feed system for stacked helixes is a little more complex than for a single helix. Figure 21-7A shows an end view of a set of four stacked helical antennas. Tapered lines (TL) are used to carry signal from each element and the coaxial
connector (B). In this case, the coaxial connector is a feed-through “barrel” SO-239
device at the center of the groundplane (B). A side view of the tapered line system

Chap21_Carr

4/10/01

3:57 PM

Page 429

Multiple helical antennas 429

21-5 Helical antenna.

21-6 Dual/quad helical antenna.

Chap21_Carr

4/10/01

3:57 PM

Page 430

430 Antennas for radio astronomy

21-7 Frontal view of quad helical antenna.

Chap21_Carr

4/10/01

3:57 PM

Page 431

Interferometer antennas 431
is shown in Fig. 21-7B. The length of the tapered lines is 1.06, while the center-tocenter spacing between the helical elements is 1.5. The length of each side of the
groundplane is 2.5. In the case of Fig. 21-7, the antenna is fed from the front of
the groundplane.

Interferometer antennas
The resolution of an antenna is set by its dimensions a relative to the wavelength 
of the received signal. Better resolution can be achieved by increasing the size of the
antenna, but that is not always the best solution. Figure 21-8 shows a summation
interferometer array. Two antennas with aperture a are spaced S wavelengths
apart. The radiation pattern is a fringe pattern (Fig. 21-9). This pattern consists of a
series of maxima and nulls. The resolution angle  to the first null is
S a

[21.6]
57.3
The interferometer can be improved with additional antennas in the array. Professional radio astronomers use very wide baseline antennas. With modern communications it is possible to link radio telescopes on different continents to make the
widest possible baseline.

21-8 Interferometer array.

Chap21_Carr

4/10/01

3:57 PM

Page 432

432 Antennas for radio astronomy

21-9 Interferometer pattern.

22

CHAPTER

Adjusting, installing,
and troubleshooting
antennas and
transmission lines
ANTENNA AND TRANSMISSION LINE MEASUREMENTS SHOULD BE MADE WHEN THE ANTENNA

is first installed and periodically thereafter. If some difference in operation is noted,
the same measurements should be repeated. Many antenna measurements are difficult to make with any degree of accuracy. There are some things about antennas that
can and should be measured, however, regardless of the difficulty. For example,
VSWR and the resonant frequency of the antenna are readily accessible. It’s also possible to measure the impedance of the antenna feedpoint. You can measure the
VSWR either with a special VSWR meter (often built into transmitters or antenna
tuning units), or by using an RF wattmeter.
By frequency stepping through the band and testing the VSWR at various frequencies, one can draw a VSWR curve (Fig. 22-1) that shows how the antenna performs across the band. The resonant frequency is the point where the VSWR dips to
a minimum (which may or may not be the much sought-after 1:1).
You can use the resonant frequency to figure out whether the antenna is too long
(resonant frequency lower than the hoped-for design frequency), or too short (resonant frequency above the design frequency). Figure 22-2 shows all three situations.
Curve A represents the desired or ideal curve that is centered on the desired frequency FD. If the antenna is too long, however, the resonant frequency will be shifted
downward towards F1, and curve B will be observed. Similarly, if the antenna is too
short, curve C will be found as the resonant frequency shifts upband to F2.
But resonant frequency and VSWR curves are not the entire story because they
don’t tell us anything about the impedance presented by the antenna. One cannot
get the VSWR to be 1:1 unless the antenna impedance and transmission line impedance are the same. For example, a dipole has a nominal textbook impedance of 73 Ω,

Copyright 2001 - the McGraw-Hill Companies

433

Chap22_Carr

4/10/01

3:56 PM

Page 434

434 Adjusting, installing, and troubleshooting antennas and transmission lines

22-1 VSWR-vs-frequency plot.

22-2 VSWR-vs-frequency plot for three frequencies.

so it makes a very good match to 75-Ω coaxial cable. But the actual impedance of a
real dipole may vary from a few ohms to more than 100 Ω. For example, if your antenna exhibits a feedpoint impedance of (say) 25 Ω, using 75-Ω coaxial cable to feed
it produces a VSWR75/253:1. Not too great. Measuring the feedpoint impedance
is therefore quite important to making the antenna work properly.
There are any number of instruments on the market that will aid in making antenna measurements. Some of them are quite reasonably priced (or can be built),
while others are beyond the reach of all but the most ardent and well-endowed en-

Chap22_Carr

4/10/01

3:56 PM

Page 435

VSWR analyzers 435
thusiasts. In this chapter we will look at a newer breed of more universal instrument
called the SWR analyzer.

VSWR analyzers
One basic premise in this chapter is that the instruments used for measuring VSWR
must be accessible to people who don’t have a commercial or ham operator’s license,
as well as those who do (we must remember our SWL and scanner friends). Some of
the instruments used by hams meet that requirement, but a relatively new breed
of instrument called the SWR analyzer provides a lot of capability to the SWL, scanner operator, and ham radio operator alike. It uses a low-power RF signal generator
and some clever circuitry to measure the VSWR of the antenna. One model also measures the feedpoint resistance.
The MFJ-259 VSWR analyzer (MFJ Enterprises, Inc., P.O. Box 494, Mississippi
State, MS, 39762) is shown in Fig. 22-3. This instrument combines a VSWR analyzer
with a digital frequency counter, and operates over the range 1.8 to 170 MHz. A band
switch is set to the desired band, and then the tune control is set to the desired frequency. The meter will then read the VSWR at the design frequency. Alternatively,
you can adjust the tune control until the minimum VSWR is found. This frequency is
the actual, versus the desired, resonant frequency of the antenna. The front panel
of the MFJ-259 has two meters, SWR and RESISTANCE. The SWR meter is calibrated up to 3:1, with a little uncalibrated scale to indicate higher SWRs.
The resistance meter is calibrated from 0 to 500 Ω, which is consistent with the
SWR range. Two controls on the front panel are tune and frequency (a band
switch). The MFJ-259 has a digital frequency meter to measure the operating frequency of the internal oscillator. This frequency counter can also be used to measure
the frequency of external signal sources. (Do not connect the counter to the output
of a transmitter; the instrument will be destroyed.) The top end of the MFJ-259 has
a number of controls and connectors. An SO-239 UHF-style coaxial connector is provided for the antenna connection. A BNC coaxial connector is provided to apply external signal to the frequency counter, while a push button input switch is available
to switch the counter from internal to external signal sources. Another push button
switch is used to set the gate timing of the counter (a red LED on the front panel
blinks every time the gate is triggered). The tuning is from 1.8 MHz to 174 MHz,
while the counter will measure up to 200 MHz.
The MFJ-259 will work from an external 12-Vdc source, or from an internal battery pack consisting of eight size-AA standard cells. MFJ recommends that either
alkaline or rechargeable batteries, rather than ordinary zinc-carbon cells, be used in
order to reduce the possibility of leakage that can damage the instrument (this is
good practice in all battery-powered instruments).
Unlike many lesser SWR meters, this instrument is not fooled by antennas that
have impedances consisting of both resistance and reactance elements. An example
in the manual demonstrates an impedance of 25 j25 Ω (i.e., R is 25 Ω and reactance
X is also 25 Ω). When connected to a 50-Ω load one might be tempted to think
the VSWR is 1:1, and some cheaper meters will so indicate. But the actual SWR is
2.6:1, which is what the MFJ-259 will read.

Chap22_Carr

4/10/01

3:56 PM

Page 436

436 Adjusting, installing, and troubleshooting antennas and transmission lines

22-3 MFJ-259 VSWR analyzer.

The resistance measurement assumes a resistive load (i.e., the measurement is
made at the antenna’s resonant frequency), and is referenced to 50 Ω. The VSWR
and resistance measurements should be consistent with each other. If the VSWR is
2:1, then the resistance should be either 100 Ω (100/50  2:1) or 25 Ω (50/25  2:1).
If the resistance is not consistent with the VSWR reading, then you should assume
that the impedance has a significant reactive component and take steps to tune it
out.
In addition to antenna measurements, the MFJ-259 is equipped to measure a
wide variety of other things. It will measure the velocity factor of transmission line,

Chap22_Carr

4/10/01

3:56 PM

Page 437

Doping out coaxial cable 437
help in tuning or adjusting matching stubs or matching networks, measure capacitance or inductance, and determine resonant frequency of LC networks.

Doping out coaxial cable
When you install an antenna, or do a bit of preventive maintenance, or find the antenna is not working properly, one thing to check is the transmission line. Two basic measurements are popular. Figure 22-4 shows how to make ohmic checks. The
cable consists of an inner conductor and an outer conductor (shield). With terminals A and B open there should not be any resistive path across the input terminals
(as shown). If a high resistance is seen, then there might be some contamination
in the system, or the insulation has failed, permitting a current path. A low resistance indicates a short circuit. If the cable has been cut, or an object passed
through, or the connector is messed up, then a short can result.
If terminals A-B are shorted together, a low resistance should be noted. If not,
then it is likely that the center conductor is open. Of course, if connectors are on the
line, either the shield or center conductor could be at fault.
The other issue is loss of the transmission line. Cable losses get higher as cables
age, so low loss on installation does not guarantee low loss later on. Losses in new cables run from 0.2 dB/100 ft at 4 MHz. At 30 MHz the losses are 0.7 dB/100 ft to
2.6 dB/100 ft. At VHF/UHF frequencies the losses rise considerably.
Figure 22-5 shows a test setup for coaxial cable. It is necessary to know the
length of the piece of coax under test. For ease of calculations a 100-ft section

22-4 Ohmmeter used to test coax.

Chap22_Carr

4/10/01

3:56 PM

Page 438

438 Adjusting, installing, and troubleshooting antennas and transmission lines

22-5 Attenuation test for coax.

should be used. Two RF power meters (M1 and M2) are used to measure the input
power to the line (M1) and the delivered power (M2). The difference in power determines the loss. The loss is



P 2
LossdB  10 log M
PM1



[22.1]

where
Loss is the loss of the cable, in dB
PM1 is the power reading on M1
PM2 is the power reading on M2
If the cable length is 100 ft, then you already have the loss in dB/100 ft. But if
length L is anything other than 100 ft, then you need to make the following calculation:
LossdB
LossdB/100ft  
 100
Lft

[22.2]

23

CHAPTER

Antennas for radio
direction finding (RDF)
RADIO DIRECTION FINDING IS THE ART AND PRACTICE OF EITHER LOCATING YOURSELF OR A
radio station by using a directional radio antenna and receiver. When the FCC wants
to locate an illegal station that is transmitting, they will use radio direction finders to
triangulate the position. If they find the bearing from two stations they will locate the
station at the intersection. However, there is a fair degree of ambiguity in the measurement. As a result, radio direction finders typically use three or more (hence
“triangulate”) sites. Each receiving site that can find the bearing to the station reduces the overall error.
At one time aviators and seafarers relied on radio direction finding. It is said that
the Japanese air fleet that attacked Pearl Harbor, Hawaii, on December 7, 1941
homed in on a Honolulu AM radio station. During the 1950s and early 1960s AM radios came with two little circled triangle marks at the 640-kHz and 1040-kHz points
on the dial. These were the CONALRAD frequencies that you could tune to in case
of a nuclear attack (right before you kissed your butt good-bye, I suspect). All other
radio stations were off the air except the CONALRAD stations. The enemy was prevented from using these frequencies for RDF because the system used several stations that transmitted in a rapidly rotating pattern. No one station was on the air long
enough to allow a “fix.” The result was a wavering sound to the CONALRAD station
(which we heard during tests) that would confuse any enemy who tried to DX his
way into our cities with nuclear weapons.
Radio direction finders based on the AM broadcast band (BCB) looked a bit like
Fig. 23-1. A receiver with an S meter (which measures signal strength) is equipped
with a rotatable ferrite loopstick antenna to form the RDF unit. A degree scale
around the perimeter of the antenna base could be oriented toward north so that the
bearing could be read.
Loopstick antennas have a figure-8 reception pattern (Fig. 23-2A) with the maxima parallel to the loopstick rod and the minima off the ends of the rod. When the antenna is pointed at the signal, maximum reception strength is achieved.
Unfortunately, the maxima are so broad that it is virtually impossible to find the true
point on the compass dial where the signal peaks. The peak is too shallow for that
Copyright 2001 - the McGraw-Hill Companies

439

Chap23_Carr

4/10/01

3:54 PM

Page 440

440 Antennas for radio direction finding (RDF)

23-1 Radio direction finding (RDF) receiver using a loopstick antenna.

23-2A Pattern of loopstick antenna: not oriented towards
signal.

Chap23_Carr

4/10/01

3:55 PM

Page 441

Antennas for radio direction finding (RDF) 441

23-2B Pattern of loopstick antenna: oriented towards signal.

purpose. Fortunately, the minima are very sharp. You can get a good fix on the direction of the signal by pointing the minima toward the station. This point is found
by rotating the antenna until the audio goes to zip or the S meter dips to a minimum
(Fig. 23-2B).
The loopstick is a really neat way to do RDF—except for one little problem: The
darn thing is bidirectional. There are two minima because, after all, the pattern is a figure 8. You will get exactly the same response from placing either minima in the direction of the station. As a result, the unassisted loopstick can only show you a line along
which the radio station is located, but can’t tell you which direction it is. Sometimes
this doesn’t matter. If you know the station is in a certain city, and that you are generally south of the city, and can distinguish the general direction from other clues, then
the line of minima of the loopstick will refine that information. A compass helps, of
course. Shortly we will take a look at an impromptu radio direction finder using a
portable radio.
The solution to the ambiguity problem is to add a sense antenna to the loopstick
(Fig. 23-3). The sense antenna is an omnidirectional vertical whip, and its signal is
combined with that of the loopstick in an RC phasing circuit. When the two patterns
are combined, the resultant pattern will resemble Fig. 23-4. This pattern is called a
cardioid because of the heart shape it exhibits. This pattern has only one null, so it
resolves the ambiguity of the loopstick used alone.

Chap23_Carr

4/10/01

3:55 PM

Page 442

442 Antennas for radio direction finding (RDF)

23-3 Addition of sense antenna overcomes directional ambiguity of the loopstick.

23-4 Cardioid pattern of sense-plus-loopstick antennas.

Chap23_Carr

4/10/01

3:55 PM

Page 443

Field improvisation 443

Field improvisation
Let’s suppose you are out in the woods trekking around the habitat of lions, tigers,
and bears (plus a rattlesnake or two for good measure). Normally you find your way
with a compass, a Geological Survey 7.5-min topological map, and a Global Positioning System (GPS) receiver. Those little GPS marvels can give you real good latitude
and longitude indication. But what happens if it breaks or a bear eats it? The answer
to your direction finding problem might be the little portable AM BCB radio (Fig. 235) that you brought along for company.
Open the back of the radio and find the loopstick antenna. You will need to know
which axis it lies along. In the radio shown in Fig. 23-5 the loopstick is along the top
of the radio, from left to right. In other radios it is vertical, from top to bottom. Once
you know the direction, you can tune in a known AM station and orient the radio until you find a null. Your compass can give you the bearing. If you know the approximate location of the station, then you can reverse the compass direction from it and
mark the line on the topo map. Of course, it’s still a bidirectional indication, so all you
know is the line along which you are lost.
But then you tune into a different station in a different city (or at least wide
enough from the line to the other station to make a difference) and take another
reading. Your approximate location is where the two lines cross. Take a third, fourth,
and fifth reading and you will home in pretty tight. If you were smart enough to plan
ahead, you will have selected candidate stations in advance and located their latitude and longitude. Alternatively, you would have bought the topo map that covers
their location as well as where you want to hike, and from those maps you can find
the latitudes and longitudes of the distant stations.

23-5 AM portable radio. Dark bar represents position and direction of internal loopstick.

Chap23_Carr

4/10/01

3:55 PM

Page 444

444 Antennas for radio direction finding (RDF)

Regular loop antennas
Regular wire loop antennas (Fig. 23-6) are also used for radio direction finding. In
fact, in some cases the regular loop is preferred over the loopstick. The regular loop
antenna may be square (as shown), circular, or any other regular “n-gon” (e.g.,
hexagon), although for practical reasons the square is easier to build. The loop has
pretty decent inductance even with only a few turns. One loop I built was 24 in
square (A in Fig. 23-6) and had, if I recall correctly, about 10 turns of wire spaced
over a 1-in width (B in Fig. 23-6). It resonated to the AM BCB with a standard 365pF “broadcast” variable capacitor.
When you use a regular loop antenna be aware that the antenna has a figure-8
pattern like the loopstick, but it is oriented 90° out of phase with the loopstick antenna. In the regular loop the minima (nulls) are perpendicular to the plane of the
loop, while the maxima are off the sides. In Fig. 23-6 the minima are in and out of
the page, while the maxima are left and right (or top and bottom).

Fox hunting
An activity popular with ham radio operators in the 1960s was “fox hunting.” A
fiendishly clever ham (the “fox”) would go hide with a mobile or portable transmitter (usually on either 10 or 75 m). The “hunters” would then RDF the fox’s brief
transmissions and try to locate the transmitter. If you could locate the antenna,
you located the station (according to the most common set of rules). Sometimes
the hunt got a little wild as hunters raced each other (a no-no) in the final stretch.
One friend of mine had an interesting experience. He drove a 1949 Plymouth that
was painted hideous dark green with fire-engine-red hub caps. It looked just plain awful (especially since the paint looked like it was put on with a whisk broom!). He used
a Gonset converter linked to the AM BCB receiver installed in the car. The antenna
was a wire loop on the end of a broom handle, similar to Fig. 23-7. The antenna was
mounted about where you would expect the left-side rear view mirror to be located.
He could reach his hand out the window and rotate the antenna while listening for the
minima on the receiver. Worked rather well, and he won some fox hunts.
The fox hunts in his area were usually held on Saturday or Sunday morning, and
after it was all over the whole crew would get to a restaurant for brunch or beer or
something. One morning, however, my buddy with the hideous green car was racing
down a residential street to be the first to the transmitter. Others were in the area,
and the end game was in motion. Unfortunately, a little old lady called the police
complaining about a “…nut racing up and down the street in a strange car waving a
cross out the window.” Breakfast had to wait that morning, I bet.

Shortwave and AM BCB “skip” RDF
Radio direction finding is most accurate over relatively short distances. If you can
use the ground wave, then all the better (which is what you use during daylight
hours for nearly all AM BCB stations). Skip rolls in on the AM BCB after local

Chap23_Carr

4/10/01

3:55 PM

Page 445

Shortwave and AM BCB “skip” RDF 445

23-6 Wire loop antenna.

23-7 “…waving a cross out
the window” antenna.

Chap23_Carr

4/10/01

3:55 PM

Page 446

446 Antennas for radio direction finding (RDF)
sundown, so you can hear all manner of stations all up and down the dial. You can RDF
distant stations. Some rather interesting sites have turned up when SWL DXers RDF’ed
some of the infamous “numbers stations.” Those stations transmit either CW or voice
numbers groups, and are believed to be sending messages to spies around the world.
RDFing by DXers has located some of these transmitters at, well, “interesting” sites.
Unfortunately, there are some problems with skip RDFing. When we look at
propagation drawings of skip in textbooks we usually see a one plane view. The curvature of the earth shows, as does the transmitter and receiver site. A “pencil beam”
radio signal travels at some angle up the ionosphere, where it is “reflected” (actually,
it’s a refraction phenomenon but looks like reflection to an observer on the surface)
back to earth. We can tell from the drawing that the angle of incidence equals the angle of reflection, just like they told us in high school science classes. Oops! The real
world is not so neat and crisp, however.
In the real world the wave might encounter a different ionization density along its
path of travel and therefore be deflected from its original path. It might return to
earth at a location offset from the direction it appears. If we look at the true bearing
from the receiver site to the transmitter site, and then note the azimuthal angle of arrival of the signal, we note that something is amiss.
Actual reflection also causes some problems, especially when RDFing a station in
the high end of the HF band or the VHF/UHF bands. Radio waves will reflect from geological features such as mountains, as well as man-made structures (e.g., buildings).
If the reflection is strong enough it might appear to be the real signal, and cause a severe error in RDFing. Be wary of RDF results when the “skip is in.”

Sense antenna circuit
Figure 23-8 shows a method for summing together the signals from an RDF antenna
(such as a loop) and a sense antenna. The two terminals of the loop are connected to
the primary of an RF transformer. This primary (L1A) is center-tapped and the center
tap is grounded. The secondary of the transformer (L1B) is resonated by a variable capacitor C1. The dots on the transformer coils indicate the 90° phase points.
The top of L1B is connected to the sense circuit, and to the receiver antenna input. The phasing control is a potentiometer (R1). The value of this pot is usually 10
to 100 kΩ, with 25 kΩ being a commonly seen value. Switch S1 is used to take the
sense antenna out of the circuit. The reason for this switch is that the nulls of the
loop or loopstick are typically a lot deeper than the null on the cardioid pattern. The
null is first located with the switch open. When the switch is closed you can tell
by the receiver S meter whether or not the correct null was used. If not, then reverse
the direction of the antenna and try again.

Adcock antennas
The Adcock antenna has been around since 1919 when it was patented by F. Adcock.
Figure 23-9 shows the basic Adcock RDF array. This antenna consists of two centerfed nonresonant (but identical) vertical radiators. Each side of each element is at
least 0.1 long, but need not be resonant (which means the antenna can be used

Chap23_Carr

4/10/01

3:55 PM

Page 447

Watson-Watt Adcock array 447

23-8 Sense circuit for a loop/sense antenna RDF.

over a wide band). The elements are spaced from 0.1 to 0.75, although the example shown here is spaced 0.125.
The Adcock antenna is vertically polarized, so it will respond to the vertically
polarized wave very much like loop or phased array antennas of similar size. The horizontally polarized wave, however, affects all elements the same, so the currents are
essentially cancelled, resulting in no pattern. This characteristic makes the Adcock
antenna suitable for high-frequency shortwave RDFing.
The pattern for an Adcock antenna is shown in Fig. 23-10. This pattern was
generated using the NecWin Basic for Windows program (Chap. 17). The example
antenna is a 10-MHz (30-m band) Adcock that uses 1.455-m elements (total 2.91
m on each side), spaced 4 m apart. The pattern is a traditional figure-8 with deep
nulls at 0° and 180°. The antenna can be rotated to find a null in the same manner
as a loop.

Watson-Watt Adcock array
Figure 23-11 shows the Watson-Watt Adcock RDF array. It consists of two Adcock
arrays arranged orthogonally to each other. It is common practice to arrange one Adcock in the east-west direction and the other in the north-south direction. These are
fed to identical receivers that are controlled by a common local oscillator (LO). The
outputs of the receivers are balanced, and are used to drive the vertical and horizontal plates of a cathode-ray oscilloscope (CRO). Figure 23-12 shows the patterns
achieved by signals of various phases arriving at the Watson-Watt array. The patterns
of Figs. 23-12A and 23-12B are made from signals 180° out of phase, while the
signal of Fig. 23-12C has a 90° phase difference.

Chap23_Carr

4/10/01

3:55 PM

Page 448

448 Antennas for radio direction finding (RDF)

23-9 Adcock array RDF antenna.

Chap23_Carr

4/10/01

3:55 PM

Page 449

Watson-Watt adcock array 449

23-10 Adcock pattern.

23-11 Watson-Watt Adcock array.

Chap23_Carr

4/10/01

3:55 PM

Page 450

450 Antennas for radio direction finding (RDF)

23-12 Patterns for different signals on the Watson-Watt array.

Doppler RDF antennas
Figure 23-13 shows the basic concept of a Doppler RDF antenna. The Doppler effect was discovered in the nineteenth century. A practical example of the Doppler
effect is seen when a wailing ambulance siren is approaching you, and then passes
you and heads away from you. The wailing pitch will rise as the sound source approaches, and then fall as the sound source recedes in the opposite direction.
In a radio system, when the antenna and signal source move with respect to each
other, a Doppler shift is generated. This shift is proportional to the relative speed difference. The Doppler RDF antenna of Fig. 23-13 uses a rotating antenna. The signal
approaches from a single direction, so there will be a predictable Doppler shift at any
point on the circular path of the antenna. The magnitude of the phase shift is
R$ Fc
S 
[23.1]
c

Chap23_Carr

4/10/01

3:55 PM

Page 451

Wullenweber array 451

23-13 Doppler antenna.

where
S is the Doppler shift, in hertz
R is the radius of rotation, in meters
$ is the angular velocity of the antenna, in radians per second
Fc is the carrier frequency of the incoming signal, in hertz
c is the velocity of light (3  108 m/s)
In theory this antenna works nicely, but in practice there are problems. One of
the big problems is getting a large enough Doppler shift to easily measure. Unfortunately, the rotational speed required of the antenna is very high—too high for practical use. However, the effect can be simulated by using a number of antennas,
arranged in a circle, that are sequentially scanned. The result is a piecewise approximation of the effect seen when the antenna is rotated at high speed.

Wullenweber array
One of the problems associated with small RDF antennas is that they have such a small
aperture that relatively large distortions of their pattern result from even small anomalies. Follow that? What it means is that the pattern is all messed up by small defects.
If you build a wide-aperture direction finder (WADF), however, you can average the
signals from a large number of antenna elements distributed over a large-circumference circle. The Wullenweber array (Fig. 23-14) is such an antenna. It consists of a circle of vertical elements. In the HF band the circle can be 500 to 2000 ft in diameter.
A goniometer rotor spins inside the ring to produce an output that will indicate
the direction of arrival of the signal as a function of the position of the goniometer.
The theoretical resolution of the Wullenweber array is on the order of 0.1°, although
practical resolutions of about 2.8° are commonly seen.

Chap23_Carr

4/10/01

3:55 PM

Page 452

452 Antennas for radio direction finding (RDF)

23-14 Wullenweber RDF array.

Time difference of arrival (TDOA) array
If you erect two antennas with distance d apart, then arriving signals can be detected
by examining the time-of-arrival difference. Figure 23-15A shows an example signal.
If the advancing wavefront is parallel to the line between the antennas, then it will
arrive at both antennas at the same time. The TDOA is zero in that case. But if the
signal arrives at an angle (as in Fig. 23-15A), it will arrive at one antenna first. From
the difference between the time of arrival at the two antennas we can discern the direction of arrival.
There is an ambiguity in the basic TDOA array in that the combined output will
be the same for conjugate angles, i.e. at the same angle from opposite directions.
This problem can be resolved by the system shown in Fig. 23-15B. The signals from
ANT1 and ANT2 are designated V1 and V2, respectively. These signals are detected
by receivers (RCVR1 and RCVR2), and are then threshold detected in order to prevent signal-to-noise problems from interfering with the operation. The outputs of the
threshold detectors are used to trigger a sawtooth generator that controls the horizontal sweep on an oscilloscope.
The two signals are then delayed, and one is inverted. The reason for inverting
one signal is to allow the operator to distinguish them on the CRT screen. The reason why this is necessary is the ambiguity. If the antennas in Fig. 23-15A are arrayed
east to west, then the line perpendicular to the line between them is north to south.
If we designate north as 0°, then the signal shown arrives at an angle of 330°.
That means it will arrive at ANT1 before it arrives at ANT2. A signal arriving from a
bearing of 30° will produce the same output signal, even though it arrives at ANT2
before ANT1. All signals of bearing 0 ≤ x < 180° will arrive at ANT2 first, while all

Chap23_Carr

4/10/01

3:55 PM

Page 453

Time difference of arrival (TDOA) array 453

23-15A Time difference of arrival (TDOA) RDF array.

23-15B Block diagram of typical TDOA circuit.

Chap23_Carr

4/10/01

3:55 PM

Page 454

454 Antennas for radio direction finding (RDF)
signals 180 ≤ x < 360° will arrive at ANT1 first. Yet both will produce the same blip
on the oscilloscope screen. The solution to discerning which of the two conjugate angles is intended is to invert the ANT1 signal. When this is done, the ANT1 signal falls
below the baseline on the CRT screen, while the ANT2 signal is above the baseline.
By noting the time difference between the pulses, and their relative position, we can
determine the bearing of the arriving signal.

Switched-pattern RDF antennas
Suppose we have a unidirectional pattern such as the cardioid shown in Fig. 23-16. If we
can rapidly switch the pattern back and forth between two directions that are 180°
apart, then we can not only discern direction, but also we can tell whether an off-axis
signal is left or right. This feature is especially useful for mobile and portable direction
finding.
In Fig. 23-16 we have three different positions for a signal source. When the signal source is at point A, it will affect the pattern to the left more than the pattern to
the right, so the meter will read left. If the signal source is at point B, on the other
hand, the signal affects both pattern positions equally, so the meter reads zero. Finally, if the signal arrives from point C, it affects the right-hand pattern more than
the left-hand pattern, so the meter reads right.
Figure 23-17 shows how such a system can be constructed. This system has
been used by amateur radio operators with “rubber ducky” VHF antennas and a sin-

23-16 Switched-pattern RDF system.

Chap23_Carr

4/10/01

3:55 PM

Page 455

Switched-pattern RDF antennas 455

23-17 Double-ducky RDF system based on the switched-pattern system.

gle receiver, where it is commonly called the double-ducky direction finder
(DDDF). The antennas are spaced from 0.25  to 1 apart over a good groundplane
(such as the roof of a car or truck). If no groundplane exists, then a sheet metal
groundplane should be provided.
In Fig. 23-17 we see the antennas are fed from a common transmission to the receiver. In order to keep them electrically the same distance apart, a pair of identical
half-wavelength sections of transmission line are used to couple to the antennas.
Switching is accomplished by using a bipolar square wave and PIN diodes. The bipolar square wave (see inset to Fig. 23-17) has a positive peak voltage and a negative peak
voltage on opposite halves of the cycle. The PIN diodes (D1 and D2) are connected in opposite polarity to each other. Diode D1 will conduct on negative excursions of the square
wave, while D2 conducts on positive excursions. The antenna connected to the conducting diode is the one that is connected to the receiver, while the other one is parasitic. The
active antenna therefore switches back and forth between ANT1 and ANT2.

Chap23_Carr

4/10/01

3:55 PM

Page 456

456 Antennas for radio direction finding (RDF)
This antenna is coupled to the receiver through a small-value capacitor (C1) so
that the square wave does not enter the receiver. This allows us to use the transmission line for both the RF signal and the switching signal. An RF choke (RFC3) is used
to keep RF from the antenna from entering the square-wave generator.
The DDDF antenna produces a phase modulation of the incoming signal that has
the same frequency as the square wave. This signal can be heard in the receiver output. When the signal’s direction of arrival is perpendicular to the line between the
two antennas, the phase difference is zero, so the audio tone disappears.
The pattern of the DDDF antenna is bidirectional, so there is the same ambiguity problem as exists with loop antennas. The ambiguity can be resolved by either of
two methods. First, a reflector can be placed /4 behind the antennas. This is attractive, but it tends to distort the antenna pattern a little bit. The other method is
to rotate the antenna through 90° (or walk an L-shaped path).

Conclusion
Radio direction finding can be very useful for locating RF noise sources, illegal stations, and other RF sources. It can also be used to locate yourself if you can get bearings on at least two stations. The lines of bearing will cross at a location approximately
where you are standing—try it, you’ll like it.

24

CHAPTER

Impedance matching
in antenna systems
ONE OF THE FIRST THINGS THAT YOU LEARN IN RADIO COMMUNICATIONS AND

broadcasting is that antenna impedance must be matched to the transmission line
impedance, and that the transmission line impedance must be matched to the output impedance of the transmitter. The reason for this requirement is that maximum
power transfer, between a source and a load, always occurs when the system impedances are matched. In other words, more power is transmitted from the system when
the load impedance (the antenna), the transmission line impedance, and the transmitter output impedance are all matched to each other.
Of course, the trivial case is where all three sections of our system have the same
impedance. For example, we could have an antenna with a simple 75-Ω resistive
feedpoint impedance (typical of a half-wave dipole in free space), and a transmitter
with an output impedance that will match 75 Ω. In that case, we need only connect
a standard-impedance 75-Ω length of coaxial cable between the transmitter and the
antenna. Job done! Or so it seems.
But there are other cases where the job is not so simple. In the case of our “standard” antenna, for example, the feedpoint impedance is rarely what the books say it
should be. That ubiquitous dipole, for example, is nominally rated at 73 Ω, but even
the simplest antenna books tell us that value is an approximation of the theoretical
free-space impedance. At locations closer to the earth’s surface, the impedance
could vary over the approximate range of 30 to 130 Ω and it might have a substantial
reactive component.
But there is a way out of this situation. We can construct an impedance-matching system that will marry the source impedance to the load impedance. This chapter examines several matching systems that might prove useful in a number of
antenna situations.

Copyright 2001 - the McGraw-Hill Companies

457

Chap24_Carr

4/10/01

3:52 PM

Page 458

458 Impedance-matching in antenna systems

Impedance-matching approaches
Antenna impedance can contain both reactive and resistive components. In most
practical applications, we are searching for a purely resistive impedance (Z = R), but
that ideal is rarely achieved. A dipole antenna, for example, has a theoretical freespace impedance of 73 Ω at resonance. As the frequency applied to the dipole is varied away from resonance, however, a reactive component appears. When the
frequency is greater than resonance, then the antenna tends to look like an inductive
reactance, so the impedance is Z = R + jX. Similarly, when the frequency is less than
the resonance frequency, the antenna looks like a capacitive reactance, so the impedance is Z = R – jX. Also, at distances closer to the earth’s surface the resistive
component may not be exactly 73 Ω, but may vary from about 30 to 130 Ω. Clearly,
whatever impedance coaxial cable is selected to feed the dipole, it stands a good
chance of being wrong.
The method used for matching a complex load impedance (such as an antenna)
to a resistive source (the most frequently encountered situation in practical radio
work) is to interpose a matching network between the load and the source (Fig.
24-1). The matching network must have an impedance that is the complex conjugate of the complex load impedance. For example, if the load impedance is R + jX,
then the matching network must have an impedance of R – jX; similarly, if the load
is R – jX then the matching network must be R + jX. The sections to follow look at
some of the more popular networks that accomplish this job.

L-section network
The L-section network is one of the most used, or at least the most published, antenna matching networks in existence: it rivals even the pi network. A circuit for the
L-section network is shown in Fig. 24-2A. The two resistors represent the source
(R1) and load (R2) impedances. The elementary assumption of this network is that
R1 < R2. The design equations are
R1 < R2 and 1 < Q < 5

[24.1]

SOURCE

MATCHING DEVICE

LOAD

Resistive
output or
source impedance

Complex
conjugate
impedance
network

Complex
impedance
load

ZS

Z'L

ZL

ZS  R
If:

ZL  R jX, then Z'L  R  jX
ZL  R  jX, then Z'L  R jX
24-1 Transmitter, matcher, and antenna system.

Chap24_Carr

4/10/01

3:52 PM

Page 459

Impedance-matching approaches 459
C

L

C

R1

R2
L

R1

R2

R1  R2

A

R1  R2

B
L

R1

R2

C

R1  R2

C
24-2 (A) L-section network; (B) reverse L section; (C) inverted L-section network.

XL = 6.28FL = Q × R1

[24.2]

1
XC = 
6.28FC

[24.3]

–1


R 

[24.4]

XL
R2
Q= = 
R1
XC

[24.5]

Q=

R2
1

also,

You will most often see this network published in conjunction with lessthan-quarter-wavelength longwire antennas. One common fault of those books and
articles is that they typically call for a “good ground” in order to make the antennas work properly. But they don’t tell you (1) what a “good ground” is and (2) how
you can obtain it. Unfortunately, at most locations a good ground means burying a
lot of copper conductor—something that most of us cannot afford. In addition, it is
often the case that the person who is forced to use a longwire, instead of a better
antenna, cannot construct a “good ground” under any circumstances because of

Chap24_Carr

4/10/01

3:52 PM

Page 460

460 Impedance-matching in antenna systems
landlords (and/or logistics) problems. The very factors that prompt the use of a
longwire antenna in the first place also prohibit any form of practically obtainable
“good ground.” But there is a way out: radials. A good ground can be simulated
with a counterpoise ground constructed of quarter-wavelength radials. These radials have a length in feet equal to 246/FMHz, and as few as two of them will work
wonders. Another form of L-section network is shown in Fig. 24-2B. This circuit
differs from the previous circuit in that the roles of the L and C components are reversed. As you might suspect, this role reversal brings about a reversal of the impedance relationships: in this circuit the assumption is that the driving source
impedance R1 is larger than the load impedance R2 (i.e., R1 > R2). The equations
are shown below:
R2 > R1
XL = R2

[24.6]



(R – R )
R1

2

[24.7]

1

(R1R2)
XC = 
XL

[24.8]

Still another form of L-section network is shown in Fig. 24-2C. Again, we are assuming that driving source impedance R1 is larger than load impedance R2 (i.e., R1 >
R2). In this circuit, the elements are arranged similar to Fig. 24-2A, with the exception that the capacitor is at the input rather than the output of the network. The
equations governing this network are:
R1 > R2 and 1 < Q < 5

[24.9]

XL = 6.28FL = (R

R)
–R
(
)2
1 2
2

[24.10]

R1R2
1
XC =  = 
6.28FC
XL

[24.11]

1
C=
6.28FXC

[24.12]

XL
L=
6.28F

[24.13]

Thus far, we have considered only matching networks that are based on inductor and capacitor circuits. But there is also a possibility of using transmission line
segments as impedance-matching devices. Two basic forms are available to us: quarter-wave sections and the series matching section.

Chap24_Carr

4/10/01

3:52 PM

Page 461

Impedance-matching approaches 461

Pi networks
The pi network shown in Fig. 24-3 is used to match a high source impedance to a low
load impedance. These circuits are typically used in vacuum tube RF power amplifiers that need to match low antenna impedances. The name of the circuit comes
from its resemblance to the Greek letter pi. The equations for the pi network are:
R1 > R2 and 5 < Q < 15
Q>

[24.14]

–1


R 
R1

[24.15]

2

R2

R2
XC2 =
 (1 + Q2) – 1
R1



[24.16]

R1
XC1 = 
Q
R1 {(Q + (R2/XC2)}
XL = 
Q2 + 1

[24.17]

Split-capacitor network
The split-capacitor network shown in Fig. 24-4 is used to transform a source impedance
that is less than the load impedance. In addition to matching antennas, this circuit is
also used for interstage impedance matching inside communications equipment. The
equations for design are
R1 < R2

[24.18]

–1


R 

[24.19]

Q>

R1
2

R2
XL = 
Q

[24.20]
L

24-3 Pi network.

R1

C1

C2

R1  R2

R2

Chap24_Carr

4/10/01

3:52 PM

Page 462

462 Impedance matching in antenna systems

C1A
L
R1

R2

C1B

24-4 Split-capacitor network.

R1  R2

[24.21]

[24.22]

Transmatch circuit
One version of the transmatch is shown in Fig. 24-5. This circuit is basically a combination of the split-capacitor network and an output tuning capacitor (C 2). For the
HF bands, the capacitors are on the order of 150 pF per section for C1, and 250 pF
for C2. The collar inductor should be 28 µH. The transmatch is essentially a coaxto-coax impedance matcher, and is used to trim the mismatch from a line before it
affects the transmitter.

C2
C1A
L
R1

C1B

R2

24-5 Split-capacitor transmatch network.

Chap24_Carr

4/10/01

3:52 PM

Page 463

Transmatch circuit 463
Perhaps the most common form of transmatch circuit is the tee network shown in
Fig. 24-6. This network is lower in cost than some of the others, but suffers a problem.
Although it does, in fact, match impedance (and thereby, in a naive sense, “tunes out”
VSWR on coaxial lines), it also suffers a high pass characteristic. The network, therefore, does not reduce the harmonic output of the transmitter. The simple tee network
does not serve one of the main purposes of the antenna tuner: harmonic reduction.
An alternative network, called the SPC transmatch, is shown in Fig. 24-7. This
version of the circuit offers harmonic attenuation, as well as matching impedance.
Figure 24-8 shows commercially available antenna tuners based on this transmatch design. The unit shown in Fig. 24-8A is manufactured by MFJ Electronics, Inc.
It contains the usual three tuning controls, here labeled transmitter, antenna, and
inductor. Included in this instrument is an antenna selector switch that allows the operator to select a coax antenna through the tuner, to connect input to output (coax)
without regard to the tuner, select a balanced antenna, or connect an internal dummy
load. The instrument also contains a multifunction meter that can measure 200 W or
2000 W (full scale), in either forward or reverse directions. In addition, the meter operates as a VSWR meter.

C1

24-6 Tee-network transmatch.

L

R2

C2A

C1

R1

R1

C2

L

C2B

R2

24-7 Improved transmatch offers
harmonic attenuation.

Chap24_Carr

4/10/01

3:52 PM

Page 464

464 Impedance-matching in antenna systems
Figures 24-8B through 24-8D show an imported tuner from the United Kingdom.
This instrument, called the Nevada model, is a low-cost model, but contains the three
basic controls. For proper operation, an external RF power meter, or VSWR meter, is
required. The tuner is shown in Fig. 24-8B; also shown is a Heathkit transmatch antenna tuner. The rear panel of the Nevada instrument is shown in Fig. 24-8C. There
are SO-239 coaxial connectors for input and unbalanced output, along with a pair of
posts for the parallel line output. A three-post panel is used to select which antenna
the RF goes to: unbalanced (coax) or parallel. The internal circuitry of the Nevada is
shown in Fig. 24-8D. The roller inductor is in the center and allows the user to set the
tuner to a wide range of impedances over the entire 3- to 30-MHz HF band.

24-8A MFJ antenna tuner.

24-8B Author’s Heathkit antenna
tuner and the Nevada
tuner from the United
Kingdom.

24-8C Rear of Nevada tuner.

Chap24_Carr

4/10/01

3:52 PM

Page 465

Transmatch circuit 465

24-8D Inside of Nevada tuner.

Coaxial cable BALUNS
A balun is a transformer that matches an unbalanced resistive source impedance
(such as a coaxial cable), to a “balanced” load (such as a dipole antenna). With the
circuit of Fig. 24-9, we can make a balun that will transform impedance at a 4:1 ratio,
with R2 = 4 × R1. The length of the balun section of coaxial cable is
492V
Lft = 
FMHz

[24.23]

where:
Lft is the length, in feet
V is the velocity factor of the coaxial cable (a decimal fraction)
FMHz is the operating frequency, in megahertz

Matching stubs
A shorted stub can be built to produce almost any value of reactance. This fact can
be used to make an impedance-matching device that cancels the reactive portion of
a complex impedance. If we have an impedance of Z = R + j30 Ω we need to make a
stub with a reactance of –j30 Ω to match it. Two forms of matching stub are shown in
Figs. 24-10A and 24-10B. These stubs are connected exactly at the feedpoint of the
complex load impedance, although they are sometimes placed farther back on the
line at a (perhaps) more convenient point. In that case, however, the reactance required will be transformed by the transmission line between the load and the stub.

Chap24_Carr

4/10/01

3:52 PM

Page 466

466 Impedance-matching in antenna systems
R2

R2  4R1

24-9 Coaxial balun transformer.

R1

Load
impedance

ZR

jX

Matching
stub

24-10A Stub match scheme.

Transmission
line to
source

Chap24_Carr

4/10/01

3:52 PM

Page 467

Transmatch circuit 467
Load
impedance
ZR

jX

}

24-10B Coaxial stub matching.

L

R1

Quarter-wave matching sections
Figure 24-11 shows the elementary quarter-wavelength transformer section connected
between the transmission line and the antenna load. This transformer is also sometimes called a Q section. When designed correctly, this transmission line transformer is capable of matching the normal feedline impedance Zs to the antenna
feedpoint impedance ZR. The key factor is to have available a piece of transmission
line that has an impedance Zo of
Z

Zo = Z
s R

[24.24]

Most texts show this circuit for use with coaxial cable. Although it is certainly possible, and even practical in some cases, for the most part there is a serious flaw in using coax for this project. It seems that the normal range of antenna feedpoint
impedances, coupled with the rigidly fixed values of coaxial-cable surge impedance
available on the market, combines to yield unavailable values of Zo. Although there are
certainly situations that yield to this requirement, many times the quarter-wave section is not usable on coaxial-cable antenna systems having standard impedance values.
On parallel transmission line systems, on the other hand, it is quite easy to
achieve the correct impedance for the matching section. We use the equation above
to find a value for Zo, and then calculate the dimensions of the parallel feeders. Be-

Chap24_Carr

4/10/01

3:52 PM

Page 468

468 Impedance-matching in antenna systems
ZL
Load
impedance

Zo

}

/4 Q section

24-11 Quarter-wavelength Q section.

Zs

cause we know the impedance, and can more often than not select the conductor diameter from available wire supplies, you can use the equation below to calculate
conductor spacing:
S = D  10(Z/276)

[24.25]

where
S is the spacing
D is the conductor diameter
Z is the desired surge impedance.
From there you can calculate the length of the quarter-wave section from the
familiar 246/FMHz. D and S are in the same units.

Series matching section
The quarter-wavelength section, covered in the preceding section, suffers from
drawbacks: it must be a quarter-wavelength and it must use a specified (often nonstandard) value of impedance. The series matching section is a generalized case of

Chap24_Carr

4/10/01

3:52 PM

Page 469

Transmatch circuit 469
the same idea, and it permits us to build an impedance transformer that overcomes
these faults. According to The ARRL Antenna Book, this form of transformer is capable of matching any load resistance between about 5 and 1200 Ω. In addition, the
transformer section is not located at the antenna feedpoint.
Figure 24-12 shows the basic form of the series matching section. There are
three lengths of coaxial cable: L1, L2, and the line to the transmitter. Length L1 and
the line to the transmitter (which is any convenient length) have the same characteristic impedance, usually 75 Ω. Section L2 has a different impedance from L1 and
the line to the transmitter. Note that only standard, easily obtainable values of impedance are used here.
The design of this transformer consists of finding the correct lengths for L1 and
L2. You must know the characteristic impedance of the two lines (50 Ω and 75 Ω
given as examples), and the complex antenna impedance. In the case where the antenna is non resonant, this impedance is of the form Z = R ± jX, where R is the resistive portion, X is the reactive portion (inductive or capacitive), and j is the
so-called imaginary operator (i.e., square root of minus one). If the antenna is resonant, then X = 0, and the impedance is simply R.
The first chore in designing the transformer is to normalize the impedances:
ZL1
N=
Zo

[24.26]

RL
R=
Zo

[24.27]

XL
X=
Zo

[24.28]

The lengths are determined in electrical degrees, and from that determination
we can find length in feet or meters. If we adopt ARRL notation and define A = tan
L1, and B = tan L2, then the following equations can be written:
If: ZL = R ± jXL

L3

L2

Zo

Z1

R1

L1

Zo
R2

24-12 Series matching section.

Chap24_Carr

4/10/01

3:52 PM

Page 470

470 Impedance-matching in antenna systems
(r – 1)2 + X 2
tan L2 = B = 
r{N – (1/N)2} – (r – 1)2 – X 2

[24.29]

{N – (r/R)} × B + X
tan L1 = A = 
r + (XNB) – 1

[24.30]

where:
Z1
N= 
Zo
RL
r= 
Zo
XL
Z= 
Zo
Constraints:
S
W
R

Z1 > Zo V

[24.31]

Z1 < Zo V
S
W
R


[24.32]

If L1 < 0, then add 180º
If B < 0, then Z1 is too close to Zo
Z1 not equal to Zo
Zo V
S
W
R
 < Z1 < ZoV
S
W
R

Physical length in feet:
L1 λ
L1 = 
360
L2 λ
L2 = 
360

[24.33]
[24.34]

where
984 × velocity factor

λ = frequency in megahertz

[24.35]

The physical length is determined from arctan A and arctan B, divided by 360
and multiplied by the wavelength along the line and the velocity factor.
Although the sign of B can be selected as either – or +, the use of + is preferred
because a shorter section is obtained. In the event that the sign of A turns out negative, add 180º to the result.
There are constraints on the design of this transformer. For one thing, the impedance of the two sections L1 and L2 cannot be too close together. In general, the
following relationships must be observed:

Chap24_Carr

4/10/01

3:52 PM

Page 471

Ferrite core inductors 471
Either
ZL1 > Zo × SWR

[24.36]

ZL1 < Zo

SWR

[24.37]

or

Ferrite core inductors
The word ferrite refers to any of several examples of a class of materials that behave
similarly to powdered iron compounds, and are used in radio equipment in the form
of inductors and transformers. Although the original materials were of powdered
iron, and indeed the name ferrite still implies iron, many modern materials are composed of other compounds. According to the Amidon Associates literature, ferrites
with a permeability u of 800 to 5000 are generally of the manganese-zinc type of material, and cores with permeabilities of 20 to 800 are of nickel-zinc. The latter are
useful in the 0.5- to 100-MHz range.

Toroid cores
A toroid is a doughnut-shaped object, so one can reasonably expect a toroidal core to be
an inductor (or transformer) form, made of a ferrite material, in the general shape of a
doughnut. The type of core must be known for application purposes, and is given by the
type number. The number will be of the form: FT – xx – nn, where FT means ferrite
toroid and describes the shape, xx indicates the size, and nn indicates the material type.
The F in FT is sometimes deleted in parts lists, and the core defined as a “T-xx-nn.”
A chart is provided by Amidon that gives the dimensions, and a description of the
properties of the different types of material, along with a lot of other physical data.
Some of these data are also available in the annual ARRL publication The ARRL Handbook for the Radio Amateur (the same material has appeared in earlier editions also).
Tables are derived in part from both Amidon and ARRL sources. From these tables, you can see the sizes and properties of various popular toroids. These tables,
incidentally, are not exhaustive of either the variety of toroids available, or all of the
properties of the toroids mentioned. Using the nomenclature mentioned, a T-50-2
core refers to a core that is useful from 1 to 30 MHz, has a permeability of 10, is
painted red, and has the following dimensions: OD = 0.500 in (1.27 cm), ID = 0.281
in (0.714 cm) and a height (i.e., thickness) of 0.188 in (0.448 cm).

Toroidal transformers
A magazine reader once asked a question of this author concerning the winding protocol for toroidal transformers as seen in textbooks and magazine articles. My correspondent included a partial circuit (Fig. 24-13A) as typical of the dilemma. The
question was “How do you wind it?” and a couple of alternative methods were proposed. At first I thought it was a silly question because the answer was “obvious,”

Chap24_Carr

4/10/01

3:52 PM

Page 472

472 Impedance-matching in antenna systems

A
C1
1
a1

b1

c1

a2

b2

c2

Ferrite toroid

B

24-13 Broadband RF transformer.

a1
c2 b1
Dot end

c2

b2

a2

No-dot
end

and then I realized that perhaps I was wrong, and to many people the answer was not
at all that obvious.
The answer to the question is that all windings are wound together in a “multifilar” manner. Because there are three windings, in this case we are talking about “trifilar” windings. Figure 24-13B shows the trifilar winding method. For the sake of
clarity, I have patterned all three wires differently so that you can follow them. This
practice is also a good idea for practical situations. Since most small construction
projects use no.26, no.28 or no.30 enameled wire to wind coils, I keep three colors
of each size on hand, and wind each winding with a different color [Note: for transmitting antenna transformers use no.16, no.14, no.12, or no.10 wire]. Otherwise, label the ends with adhesive labels.

Chap24_Carr

4/10/01

3:52 PM

Page 473

Ferrite core inductors 473
The dots in the schematic, and on the pictorial, are provided to identify one end
of the coil windings. Thus, the dot and no-dot ends are different from each other,
and it usually makes a difference to circuit operation which way the ends are connected into the circuit (the issue is signal phasing).
Figure 24-14 shows two accepted methods for winding a multifilar coil on a
toroidal core. Figure 24-14A is the same method as in Fig. 24-13B, but on an actual
toroid instead of a pictorial representation. The wires are laid down parallel to each
other as shown previously. The method in Fig. 24-14B uses twisted wires. The three
wires are “chucked up” in a drill and twisted together before being wound on the
core. With one end of the three wires secured in the drill chuck, anchor the other end
of the three wires in something that will hold it taut. Some people use a bench vise
for this purpose. Turn on the drill at slow speed and allow the wires to twist together
until the desired pitch is achieved.
Be very careful when performing this operation. If you don’t have a variable
speed electric drill (so that it can be run at very low speed), then use an old-fashioned manual hand drill. If you use an electric drill, then wear eye protection. If the
wire breaks, or gets loose from its mooring at the end opposite the drill, it will whip
around wildly until the drill stops. That whipping wire will cause painful welts on the
skin, and can easily damage eyes permanently.
Of the two methods for winding toroids, the method of Figs. 24-13B and 24-14A
is preferred. When winding toroids, at least those of relatively few windings, pass the
wire through the “doughnut hole” until the toroid is about in the middle of the length
of wire. Then, loop the wire over the outside surface of the toroid, and pass it
through the hole again. Repeat this process until the correct number of turns is
wound onto the core. Be sure to press the wire against the toroid form, and keep it
taut as you wind the coils.
Enameled wire is usually used for toroid transformers and inductors and that type
of wire can lead to a problem. The enamel can chip and cause the copper conductor to
contact the core. On larger cores, such as those for antenna-matching tranformers (and
baluns used at kilowatt power levels), the practical solution is to wrap the bare toroid
core in a layer of fiberglass packing tape. Wrap the tape exactly as if it was wire, but
overlap the turns slightly to ensure covering the entire circumference of the core.
On some projects, especially those in which the coils and transformers use very
fine wire (e.g., no.30), you may experience a tendency for the wire windings to unravel after the winding is completed. This problem is also easily curable. At the ends
of the windings, place a tiny dab of rubber cement or RTV silicone sealer.

24-14 Winding a toroidal transformer
A) parallel wound,
B) twist wound.

A

B

Chap24_Carr

4/10/01

3:52 PM

Page 474

474 Impedance-matching in antenna systems
Mounting toroid cores Now that you have a properly wound toroidal inductor
or transformer, it is time to actually mount it in a circuit being constructed. There
are three easy ways to do this job. First, you might be able to ignore it. If the wire is
heavy enough, then just use the wire connections to the circuit board or terminal
strip to support the component. But if this is not satisfactory, and in mobile equipment (or wherever else vibration is a factor) it won’t be, then try laying the toroid flat
on the board and cementing it in place with silicone seal or rubber cement. The third
method is to drill a hole in the wiring board and use a screw and nut to secure the
toroid. Do not use metallic hardware for mounting the toroid! Metallic fasteners will
alter the inductance of the component and possibly render it unusable. Use nylon
hardware for mounting the inductor, or transformer.
How many turns? Three factors must be taken into consideration when making toroid transformers or inductors: toroid size, core material, and number of
turns of wire.The toroid size is selected as a function of power-handling capability,
or for convenience of handling. The core material is selected according to the frequency range of the circuit. The only thing left to vary is the number of turns. The
size and core material yields a figure called the AL factor. The required value of inductance and the AL factor are used in the following equation:

where:
N is the number of turns
LµH is the inductance in microhenrys
AL is the core factor, in microhenrys per 100 turns
Example Calculate the number of turns required to make a 5-µH inductor on
a T-50-6 core. The AL factor is 40.
Solution:

Don’t take the equation value too seriously, however, because it is my experience
that a wide tolerance exists on amateur-grade ferrite cores. Although it isn’t too much
of a problem when building transformers, it can be critical when making inductors for
a tuned circuit. When you find that the tuned circuit takes considerably more (or
less) capacitance than called for in the standard equation, and all of the stray capacitance is properly taken into consideration, then it may be that the actual AL value of
your particular core is different from the table value.

Chap24_Carr

4/10/01

3:52 PM

Page 475

Ferrite core inductors 475

Ferrite rods
Another form of ferrite core available on the market is the rod, shown in Fig.
24-15A. This type of core is used to make RF chokes, such as the RFC used in the
vacuum tube filament lines of a linear amplifier power tube (Fig. 24-15B). They are
also used for baluns by some people. The two windings are wound in a bifilar manner over the ferrite rod. Of course, the wires used must be heavy enough to carry the
filament current of the tube. As was true in the toroidal transformer, I use two different wire colors in order to make it easy to identify windings.
Ferrite rods are also used in receiving antennas. Although the amateur use is not
extensive, there are places where a ferrite rod antenna (or “loopstick”) is used. For
example, in radio direction finding antennas, it is common to see the ferrite loop.
Also, some amateurs report that they use a loopstick receiving antenna when operating on crowded bands, such as 40 and 75 m. The small loopstick has an extremely
directional characteristic, so it is capable of nulling out interfering signals. Of course,
you would not want to use the loopstick for transmitting, so some means must be
found for transferring the antennas over between the transmit and receive functions.
Mounting ferrite rods Ferrite rods can be mounted in several ways, two of which
are analagous to the methods used on toroids. We can, for example, mount the rod using
either its own wires for support or by using a dab of cement or silicone sealer to fasten it
to the board. Although we cannot use simple nylon screws the way we can on toroids, we
can use insulating cable clamps to secure the ends of the rod to the board.

Toroid broadbanded impedance matching transformers
The toroidal transformer forms a broadbanded means for matching antenna impedance to the transmission line, or matching the transmission line to the transmitter.
The other matching methods (shown thus far) are frequency-sensitive, and must be
readjusted whenever the operating frequency is changed even a small amount. Although this problem is of no great concern to fixed-frequency radio stations, it is of
critical importance to stations that operate on a variety of frequencies.
Figure 24-16A shows a trifilar transformer that provides a 1:1 impedance ratio,
but it will transform an unbalanced transmission line (e.g., coaxial cable) to a

B

Cathode RF choke

A

Filaments
24-15 Ferrite rod inductor (A) construction, (B) use in amplifier.

Chap24_Carr

4/10/01

3:52 PM

Page 476

476 Impedance-matching in antenna systems
balanced signal required to feed a dipole antenna. Although it provides no impedance transformation, it does tend to balance the feed currents in the two halves of
the antenna. This fact makes it possible to obtain a more accurate figure-8 dipole radiation pattern in the horizontal plane. Many station owners make it standard practice to use a balun at the antenna feedpoint.
The balun shown in Fig. 24-16B is designed to provide the unbalanced to balanced
transformation, while also providing a 4:1 impedance ratio. Thus, a 300 Ω folded dipole
feedpoint impedance will be transformed to 75 Ω unbalanced. This type of balun is often
included inside antenna tuners, including all three models shown in Figs. 24-8A and 248B. A variable (or at least settable) broadbanded transformer is shown in Fig. 24-16C. In
this case the output winding is tapped, and the operator selects the correct tap needed
to provide the desired impedance ratio. The usual turns ratio criterion applies.
Another multiple-impedance transformer is shown in Fig. 24-16D. In this case,
the operator can select impedance transformation ratios of 1.5:1, 4:1, 9:1 or 16:1. A
commercial version of this type of transformer is shown in Fig. 24-16E. It is manufactured by Palomar Engineers, and is intended for vertical antenna feeding in the HF
bands. It will, however, work well on antennas other than simple verticals. A top view
of the vertical antenna feeding transformer is in Fig. 24-16F.

R
unbalanced
24-16A BALUN 1:1.

R
balanced
R2

L1

L2
24-16B Balun 1:4.

R1
R2 = 4R1

Chap24_Carr

4/10/01

3:52 PM

Page 477

Ferrite core inductors 477

16:1

24-16C Tapped BALUN.

9:1

R1

4:1
1.5:1

R2

24-16D Multi-impedance BALUN.

R1

24-16E Vertical antenna
feeding transformer.

24-16F Top view of
Fig. 24-16E.

R2

This page intentionally left blank

25

CHAPTER

Mobile, emergency,
portable, and
marine antennas
MOBILE OPERATION OF RADIO COMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT DATES BACK TO ONLY A

little later than “base station” operation. From its earliest times, radio buffs have attempted to place radio communications equipment in vehicles. Unfortunately, twoway radio was not terribly practical until the 1930s, when the earliest applications
were amateur radio and police radio (which used frequencies in the 1.7- to 2.0-MHz
region). Over the years, the land mobile and amateur radio mobile operation has
moved progressively higher in frequency because of certain practical considerations.
The higher the frequency, for example, the shorter the wavelength; and, therefore,
the shorter a full-size antenna. On the 11-m Citizens Band, for example, a quarterwavelength whip antenna is 102 in long, and for the 10-m amateur band only 96 in
long. At VHF frequencies, antennas become even shorter. As a result, much mobile
activity takes place in the VHF and UHF region.
The amateur 144-, 220-, and 440-MHz bands are popular because of several
factors, not the least of which is the ease of making 1⁄4- and 5⁄8-wavelength antennas.
Because low-cost commercial antennas are available for these frequencies, however, we will not examine such antennas in this chapter. Rather, we will concentrate on high-frequency antennas.

Mobile HF antennas
High-frequency (HF) mobile operation requires substantially different antennas than
VHF or UHF. Quarter-wavelength antennas are feasible only on the 11- and 10-m
bands, with some argument in favor of 13 m as well. But by the time the frequency
drops to the 21-MHz (15-m) band, the antenna size must be approximately 11 ft long,
and that is too long for practical mobile operation. Because of practical considerations,
Copyright 2001 - the McGraw-Hill Companies

479

Chap25_Carr

4/10/01

3:49 PM

Page 480

480 Mobile, emergency, portable, and marine antennas
you must limit antenna size to 8 or 9 ft; in the amateur radio bands the 8-ft antenna is
most popular because it is resonant on 10 m. At all lower frequencies, the 8-ft whip
becomes capacitive, and therefore requires an equal inductive reactance to cancel the
capacitive reactance of the antenna.
Figure 25-1 shows three basic configurations of coil-loaded HF antennas for frequencies lower than the natural resonant frequency of the antenna. In each case, the
antennas are series fed with coaxial cable from the base; point A is connected to
the coaxial cable center conductor, and point B is connected to the shield, and the car
body (which serves as ground). The system shown in Fig. 25-1A is base-loaded. Although convenient, there is some evidence that the current distribution is less than
optimum. The version shown in Fig. 25-1B is center-loaded, and results in an improved current distribution. This configuration is probably the most common among
commercially available HF mobile antennas, although the coil is often located slightly
above the center point. Finally, we see the top-loaded coil system in Fig. 25-1B. In all
three cases, the point is to use the inductance of the coil to cancel the capacitive
reactance of the antenna.
A modified version of the coil-loaded HF mobile antenna is shown in Fig. 25-2A.
In this configuration the loading inductance is divided between two individual coils,
L1 and L2. Coil L1 is adjustable with respect to the antenna, while L2 is fixed; coil L2
is tapped, however, in order to match the impedance of the antenna to the charac-

25-1 Loaded mobile antennas.

A
B

A
B

A

A
B

B

C

Chap25_Carr

4/10/01

3:49 PM

Page 481

Mobile HF antennas 481

L1

25-2A Practical mobile antenna
for HF bands below 10 m;
L1 resonates, L2 matches
impedance.

COAX to
RIG or RCVR

L2

teristic impedance of the coaxial-cable transmission line. When tuning this antenna,
two instruments are needed: a field strength meter and a VSWR meter. The field
strength meter gives a relative indication of the amount of power radiated from the
antenna, while the VSWR meter helps determine the state of the impedance match.
A pair of relative field strength meter projects are discussed later in this chapter.
Variations on the theme are shown in Figs. 25-2B and 25-2C. A helical whip is
shown in Fig. 25-2B. In this configuration, the inductor is distributed along the
length of a fiberglass antenna rod. The conductor is a wire that is helically wound on
the fiberglass shaft. An adjustable tip sets the antenna to resonance. The length of
this tip can be set by a local field strength meter. Fixed versions of this type of antenna are very popular on the Citizens Band where they may be as short as 30 in, or
as long as 48 in. There are also some amateur radio commercial antennas based on
this concept.
The other variant is shown in Fig. 25-2C. In this case, the lower end of the radiator
consists of a metal tube topped with a loading coil. An adjustable shaft at the top end is
used to tune the antenna to resonance. This form of antenna is popular among commercial makers of HF mobile antennas, such as the Hustler. The fixed shaft tends to be universal for all bands, while the coil and adjustable shaft form a separate “resonator” for
each band. Multiband operation of this form of antenna can be accomplished by using a
bracket such as shown in Fig. 25-2D. Although early versions of this scheme were homebrewed, several manufacturers currently make factory-built versions. The idea in Fig.
25-2D is to mount two or more resonators to a common fixed shaft.

Chap25_Carr

4/10/01

3:49 PM

Page 482

482 Mobile, emergency, portable, and marine antennas

Adjustable
tip
Adjustable
shaft
Loading
coil

Fixed
shaft

Helically wound
wire embedded
in fiberglass

A
B
A
25-2C Top-loaded mobile
antenna common in
amateur radio.

B

25-2B Helically wound mobile antenna.

Resonator
#2
Resonator
#1

25-2D Multiband toploaded antenna.
Resonator
#3

Bracket

Fixed shaft

Chap25_Carr

4/10/01

3:49 PM

Page 483

Mobile HF antennas 483
A common problem with all coil-loaded mobile antennas is that they tend to be
very high Q antennas. In other words, they are very sharply tuned. The VSWR tends
to rise rapidly as the operating frequency departs from the frequency to which the
antenna is tuned; as little as 25-kHz change of operating frequency will detune the antenna significantly. Although an antenna tuner at the output of the transmitter will
reduce the VSWR to a point that allows the transmitter to operate, that type of tuner
is merely a line flattener that does not fully address the problem. The actual problem
is that the antenna is not resonant. The efficiency of the antenna drops off rapidly as
the frequency changes. The only cure for this problem is to readjust the resonator’s
adjustable shaft as the band segment is changed (not merely the band, but the band
segment). Unfortunately, this solution requires tools, and the operator must get out
of the vehicle in order to do a good job of retuning. Another solution is to use a
motor-driven variable inductor for the loading coil. Several manufacturers offer both
base-loaded and center-loaded coils that are either motor-driven or relay-selectable
to permit frequency changing from the operator’s seat.

Tuning HF mobile antennas
Although the procedures for tuning certain specific antennas might be different
from those given below, the basic principles are the same, and can easily be adapted
to any given situation. There are two situations to consider. First is the antenna in
which there is either a single adjustable (or tap-selectable) loading coil, or a fixed
loading coil and an adjustable shaft resonator. Second is the case ( Fig. 25-2A) where
there is an adjustable or tapped coil in series with a tapped impedance-matching coil
at the base.
Case no. 1. In this case, we assume that the antenna has a single adjustment,
either a shaft resonator or adjustable coil. In this case we need to use a field strength
meter (FSM) to measure the relative field strength of the radiated signal. The antenna resonator is adjusted until the radiated field strength is maximum. Of course,
this procedure must be done in steps, keying the transmitter after each adjustment to
see what happened. Alternatively, a VSWR meter can be used to set the resonator
to a minimum VSWR.
Case no. 2. Here, we have a coil at the base that is fixed with respect to the antenna radiator element, but is tapped with respect to the coaxial cable from the
transmitter. A second coil is also used in the antenna (see Fig. 25-2A), which can be
either in the center or at the top. This coil is adjustable for setting resonance. Alternatively, this coil may be fixed, and an adjustable resonator shaft may be used to set
operating frequency. In this type of antenna the upper coil, or resonator shaft, is adjusted to resonance by using a field strength meter. The lower coil is adjusted for
minimum VSWR. Both adjustments are needed to complete the job.

Field strength meters
A field strength meter (FSM) is an instrument that measures the radiated field from
an antenna. Commercial engineering-grade instruments are calibrated in terms of
either watts/square centimeter or volts/meter, and are used for jobs such as broadcast station “proof-of-performance” tests and other professional jobs. For adjusting

Chap25_Carr

4/10/01

3:49 PM

Page 484

484 Mobile, emergency, portable, and marine antennas
antennas, however, a considerably different instrument is sufficient. This section
describes two simple, passive (which means no dc power is required) field strength
meters usable for adjusting HF radio antennas, including both CB and amateur
radio antennas.
Two forms are shown in Fig. 25-3; both are basically variations on the old-fashioned “crystal set” theme. Figure 25-3A shows the simplest form of untuned FSM.
In this circuit a small whip antenna (used for signal pickup) is connected to one
end of a grounded RF choke (RFC). The RF voltage developed across the RFC is
applied to a germanium diode detector; either IN34 or IN60 can be used. Silicon
diodes are normally preferred in signal applications, but in this case we need the
lower contact potential of germanium diodes in order to improve sensitivity (Vg is
0.2 to 0.3 V for Ge and 0.6 to 0.7. V for Si). A potentiometer is used both as the
load for the diode and as a sensitivity control to set the meter reading to a convenient level.
The untuned version of the FSM is usable even at low powers, but suffers from
a lack of sensitivity. Only a certain amount of signal can be developed across the
RFC, so this limits the sensitivity. Also, the RFC does not make a good impedance
match to the detector diode D1. An improvement is possible by adding a tuned circuit and an impedance-matching scheme, as shown in Fig. 25-3B. In this case a variable capacitor C3 is used as a tune control. The tuning capacitor is parallel resonant
with inductor L1. A tapped capacitive voltage divider (C1/C2) is used to provide impedance matching to the diode. Figure 25-3C gives values of capacitance and inductance for various bands.
Operation of the tunable FSM is simple and straightforward. Set the sensitivity
control to approximately half-scale, and then key the transmitter; adjust the tuning
control (C3) for maximum deflection of the meter pointer (readjustment of the sensitivity control may be needed). After these adjustments are made, the tunable FSM
works just like any other FSM.

Small
whip
antenna

RFC1
1 mH

D1
IN34
or
IN60
M1
50 A
0.01 F
50 k

25-3A Simple field strength meter.

Chap25_Carr

4/10/01

3:49 PM

Page 485

Antennas for emergency operations 485
Small
whip
antenna
Tune
C3
100 pF
D1

C1
L1
C2

C4
0.01
F

D2

R1
12 k

D1, D2: IN34, IN60, etc
R2
25-k
sensitivity
M1
50 A
25-3B Tuned field strength meters.

25-3C Values chart
for field
strength
meters.

Band
(meters)

L1
(H)

C1
(pF)

C2
(pF)

75/80
40
30
20
17
15
13
10

27
10
4.4
2.25
1.7
1.3
0.8
0.5

25
15
15
10
10
10
10
10

100
68
68
68
56
47
39
39

Antennas for emergency operations
Some time ago, I met an interesting character at a convention. As a medical doctor, he was a medical missionary working at a relief station in Sudan. Because of his
unique business address, he was able to discuss mobile and portable antennas for
communications from the boondocks. His bona fides for this knowledge includes
the fact that he is licensed to operate on both the amateur radio bands, and as a
landmobile (or point-to-point) station in the 6.2-MHz band. The desert where he
travels is among the worst in the world. The path they euphemistically call a “road”
is occasionally littered with camel corpses because of the harsh conditions. The
doctor’s organization requires him to check in twice daily on either 6.2 MHz or

Chap25_Carr

4/10/01

3:49 PM

Page 486

486 Mobile, emergency, portable, and marine antennas
3.885 MHz (which some missionary hams in Africa use as an unofficial calling frequency). If he misses two check-ins in a row, then the search and rescue planes are
sent up. As a result of his unique “house calls,” he does a lot of mobile and portable
operating in the lower-HF region of the spectrum. His problem is this: How do you
reliably get through the QRM and tropical QRN with only 200 W PEP and a standard loaded mobile antenna?
Another fellow I once met works in Alaska for a government agency. He faces
many of the same problems as the doctor in Sudan, but at close to 100º colder. He
frequently takes his 100-W mobile rig into the boondocks with him in a four-wheel
drive vehicle. Again, with only 100 W into a poor-efficiency loaded mobile antenna,
how does one reliably cut through the interference to be heard back at the homestead?
An earthquake, or hurricane, strikes your community. Antenna towers collapse,
tribanders become tangled masses of aluminum tubing, dipoles are snarled globs of
no.14 Copperweld, and the rig and linear amplifier are smashed under the rubble
of one corner of your house. All that remains is the 100-W HF rig in your car. How do
you reliably establish communications in “kilowatt alley” with a 100-W mobile driving
a 75-W loaded whip? Of course, you always got through one way or another before,
but now communications are not for fun—they are deadly serious. Somehow, the
distant problems of a Sudanese missionary doctor and a KL7 government forester
don’t seem too very far away.
For these operators, communications often means life or death for someone,
perhaps themselves. Given the inefficiency of the loaded whips typically used as mobile antennas in the low-HF region, the generally low power levels used in available
mobile rigs, and the crowded band conditions on the 80-, 75-, and 40-m bands, it becomes a matter of more than academic interest how you might increase the signal
strength from your portable (or mobile) emergency station. Anything we can do,
easily and cheaply, to improve the signal is like having money in the bank. Fortunately, there are several tricks of the trade that will help us out in a pinch.
Figure 25-4 shows a typical mobile antenna for a low-HF band. Because quarterwavelength antennas on these frequencies are 30 to 70 ft high, full-size vertical whip
antennas are not practical. In fact, at frequencies below 10 m, full-size whips are not
generally used. Short antennas exhibit capacitive reactance, so we add a loading coil
(inductor L in Fig. 25-4) to the radiator to make up the difference (its inductive reactance cancels the capacitive reactance of the antenna). The inductor in such a
loaded antenna can be placed almost anywhere along the radiator, although base-,
center-, and top-loaded designs predominate. The actual inductance needed varies
somewhat with coil placement, as does antenna performance. The “resonators” used
on commercial low-HF mobile antennas are loading coils encapsulated in a weathertight
housing.
The mobile configuration is inefficient by its nature, and little can be done to improve matters. Of course, an antenna-matching device or tuner will help in optimizing the power transfer to the antenna, and should always be used in any event
(especially with solid-state final amplifiers, which don’t tolerate VSWR as easily as do
tube finals). In the portable configuration, however, we can both improve the performance of “mobile” antennas and look into antenna options not open to the mobile

Chap25_Carr

4/10/01

3:49 PM

Page 487

Antennas for emergency operations 487

Less than 
4

L

Antenna
tuner

Transmitter

25-4 Basic mobile antenna system often proves unsatisfactory in
marginal cases.

operator. We can make a basic assumption for these improvements: The operator
needing emergency or urgent communications is not driving down the interstate
somewhere, but is stopped in the back country and needs to call out.
In cases of emergencies on most highways, we are in range of some repeater, so
we would use a VHF band (probably 2 m) to contact police or other emergency services through a repeater autopatch. In fact, with the wide availability of repeaters
around the country it behooves any amateur, backpacking or four-wheeling into remote areas, to be familiar with repeater locations and frequencies. From hilltops,
especially, it is often possible to hit repeaters from a surprisingly long distance. I
have seen hand-held 2-m rigs trigger mountain top repeaters from the mountains of
southwestern Virginia, and presume that other areas of the country are as well off
repeaterwise. This chapter deals with HF rigs, especially those operating in the
lower end of the HF spectrum, in situations where a temporary antenna must be
erected.
Most amateurs, who have low-HF mobile rigs, will testify that getting out is a
pain in the mike button. Antenna efficiencies are simply too poor. One factor in this
dismal equation is that the vehicle body makes a very poor antenna ground system.
One could, I suppose, carry a supply of 6- or 8-ft copper-clad steel ground rods, and
a 9-lb sledge hammer to drive them into the earth wherever a portable station is
needed. Somehow, that solution doesn’t seem too appealing at this point! Besides,
have you ever tried to remove an effective 8-ft ground rod from the ground? Forget
it, it’s too much pain for too little gain. A better solution is to provide a counterpoise

Chap25_Carr

4/10/01

3:49 PM

Page 488

488 Mobile, emergency, portable, and marine antennas
groundplane, as shown in Fig. 25-5. In Fig. 25-5A we see the electrical situation and
connection, while in Fig. 25-5B we see the mechanical scheme for a specific situation: A groundplane consists of two or more (even one helps) quarter-wavelength radials connected to the antenna ground point (i.e., where the coaxial cable shield
connects to the vehicle body). The radials are made of no. 14 wire, so are relatively
easy to stow.
Figure 25-5B shows a workable system that will improve the performance of a
mobile rig in stationary situations. The mobile antenna uses the normal base mount
attached to the rear quarter panel of the car adjacent to the trunk lid. An all-metal
grounding-type binding post is installed through an extra hole drilled in the base

Less than 
4

L

25-5A Two or more radials
improve efficiency
of mobile antenna
used in a portable
Coax to
communications
transmitter
setup.
Antenna
tuner

246
Radials: 
4 FMHz

Two or more

4 Radials

Chap25_Carr

4/10/01

3:49 PM

Page 489

Antennas for emergency operations 489


246

4 FMHz
Mobile
antenna


4 Radials

Insulators

Rope

Ground
25-5B Multiple radials are even better.

Whip

Grounding
type binding
post
Base mounting

Car body

#14
Radial

Ground point
Coax to
transmitter
or tuner
25-5C Connection of radials to mobile antenna.

Chap25_Carr

4/10/01

3:49 PM

Page 490

490 Mobile, emergency, portable, and marine antennas
insulator (see Fig. 25-5C). Radials for portable operation are attached at this point. Although the binding post is small, it easily accommodates two no. 14 radials. The owner
used the vehicle for camping, and the radials were used to improve antenna efficiency.
I don’t believe the dramatic accounts enthusiastically reported by the owner of the car,
but my own Field Day experience (and the testimony of the Sudanese missionary doctor) lead me to expect considerable improvement over the unaided loaded whip.
A potential solution to the inefficiency problem is to replace the mobile antenna
with a more efficient, but stowable, antenna that can be brought out and erected
when needed. One candidate is a surplus military HF whip antenna. Intended for
jeeps and communications trucks, these antenna/tuner combinations are collapsible and are as efficient as any on the market. Although my Alaskan friend could use
such a surplus find, my Sudanese friend could not. He told me that Americans in the
boonies, even (perhaps especially) missionaries, are always suspected by pinheaded local authorities of being agents of the dreaded “Cuban Invasion Authority.”
Showing up “out there” with obviously military radio equipment serves only to seal
that belief!
The common dipole is often looked down upon by the owners of massive array
antennas, but those old-fashioned antennas are capable of turning in some impressive results. The dipole is made by connecting two quarter-wavelength pieces of wire
to a coaxial-cable transmission line. One length is connected to the center conductor, and the other is connected to the shield of the coax. In a pinch, zip (i.e., lamp)
cord and twisted pairs of hookup wire will do for a transmission line. Figure 25-6
shows the common dipole and the normal equation for determining approximate
length. The actual length is found by trimming length until the VSWR drops to its
lowest point, a nicety that might not seem altogether important in an emergency.
The ends of the dipole must be supported on trees, masts, or some other elevated
structure. Unfortunately, mounting points aren’t easily found. My Sudanese friend
doesn’t see many trees!
Figure 25-7 shows another alternative antenna that works well for portable operation. Based on the dipole, this inverted-vee dipole does not require two end supports but rather a single center support. The length of each leg is 6 percent longer
than for a nominal dipole. Because the application is both emergency-related and
temporary in nature, we can get away with construction methods that would be unthinkable in more permanent installations.


4


4

Rope

Rope
Insulator

Center
insulator
Coax to
transmitter
25-6 Basic dipole.

Insulator

Chap25_Carr

4/10/01

3:49 PM

Page 491

Antennas for emergency operations 491

ire

W
te
an
a
nn

Mast

Insulator

Ro

pe

Holder
(see text)

25-7 Portable inverted-vee antenna.

Three problems present themselves. First, the antenna must be portable for
backpackers, or stowable in the case of those people who motor into the back country. Size and weight are major constraints in both cases, even though the vehicular
case is a lot easier to work with than the backpacker. Second, what materials and
means of construction are needed for the mast? Third, how is the mast supported?
Because the answer to the third question depends in part on the answer selected for
the second, we will deal with it first. The first question is avoided at this point because I have selected the vehicular case.
One alternative is to use a telescoping TV antenna mast to support your antenna. We can either mount a mobile whip and its associated radials at the top, or install an inverted-vee per Fig. 25-7. These masts collapse to 6 or 8 ft in length, but can
be slipped up to heights of 18, 25, 30, 40, or 50 ft, depending upon the type selected.
Keep in mind, when shopping for these masts, that the larger models are considerably heavier than shorter models, and they require two or more people to install
them. Erecting a 40- or 50-ft telescoping mast is not a single-person job, even though
you might know someone who has done it. I’ve done it, and won’t do it again! Even
the 30-ft models are a bit hairy to install alone.

Chap25_Carr

4/10/01

3:49 PM

Page 492

492 Mobile, emergency, portable, and marine antennas
Another mast that can be used for the inverted vee is made from PVC plastic
plumbing pipe. If it can be carried on or in the vehicle, then lengths up to 10 ft are
available. Longer lengths are made at the site of erection by joining together 10-ft or
shorter sections with couplings (also available at plumbing supply outlets). Be careful of using PVC pipe that is too small, however. PVC pipe is relatively thin walled,
and it is therefore flexible. Sizes below 1.5-in diameter will not easily stand alone
without guying. While a single 10-ft section might be self-supporting, two or more
sections together will not support themselves and the weight of the antenna. Guying
can be accomplished with ropes, or on a temporary basis, heavy twine.
Still another alternative is to carry steel TV antenna masts. Available in 5- and 10-ft
lengths, these masts are flared on one end and crimped on the other, so that they can
be joined together to form longer lengths. In addition, the same sources that sell these
masts also sell the guy wire rings that help support the mast when installed. There is
also a variety of rooftop mounting devices that aid also in ground mounting the antenna.
I used the TV mast solution on Field Day expeditions for many years. The inverted-vee antenna is, of course, a natural for this solution. Once, however, we used
a Hustler mobile antenna mounted at the top of a 20-ft mast, with four radials, and it
worked surprisingly well with the 30-W limit for extra points credit then available for
Field Day contestants.
There are, then, several alternatives for masts that slip up, snap together, or are
otherwise easily unstowed and installed. Let’s now turn our attention to base mounting schemes that can be used to support the mast. Of course, in a life or death pinch,
you could always just pile rocks around the base, or hold the darn thing up as you
transmit. But a little forethought could eliminate those problems easily.
One of the first solutions I’ll deal with was seen on the Outer Banks of North Carolina, and was provided to me by a CB operator. Surf fishers on the Outer Banks use
four-wheel drive vehicles to get out on the beach (to the surf, where the big sea bass
lurk). Welded to either the front or rear bumper attachments are steel tubes (see
Fig. 25-7) used for mounting the very, very long surf casting rods they use to catch
fish. The CB operator had a 20-ft mast consisting of two 10-ft TV mast sections
mounted in one of the rod holders. At the upper end of the mast was his 11-m
groundplane antenna. The same method of mounting would also support similar amateur antennas, inverted-vee dipoles, or VHF/UHF antennas.
Given that the antenna installation will be temporary, lasting only a few hours or a
couple of days in the worst case, we need not worry about long-term integrity,
or the practicality of the installation. Mounting the mast to the back of a four-wheeler or
pickup truck with a pair of U bolts is not terribly practical if you must move the vehicle,
but works nicely if you plan to camp (or are stranded) for a few days.
For lightweight masts, up to about 25 ft, the base support could be an
X-shaped base made of 2  4-in lumber (Fig. 25-8A), or even a Christmas tree
holder. Alternatively, a TV antenna rooftop tripod mount (Fig. 25-8B) is easily
adopted for use on the ground. None of these three alternatives can be depended
upon for self-supporting installations, and must be guyed even if used for only a
short period. Again, because of the temporary nature of the installation, aluminum
or wooden tent pegs can be used to anchor the guy wires. Although they are insufficient for long-term installations, they work fine for the short run.

Chap25_Carr

4/10/01

3:49 PM

Page 493

Another problem 493
Roof peak mount
for TV antenna

25-8A Wooden antenna stand.
24
Lumber

Mast

25-8B TV-antenna tripod also
works in portable
situation for HF
TV Roof
antenna masts.
tripod mount

Another problem
Field Day is a reasonably good training ground for people who anticipate operating
radio equipment under primitive conditions. If you pay attention to the sometimes
humorous foul-ups seen while getting on the air from atop High Peak Mountain in
Goose Bump National Park, then you might avoid some of the same mistakes when
foul-ups mean more than a quick drive to the nearest town. You will learn, for example, which simple tools are a must for constructing and repairing simple antennas
(including the 12-Vdc soldering iron that runs off the vehicle battery). You will also
learn a bit about electricity needed to run the rig.
Two alternatives present themselves. First, you could use 12 Vdc from the vehicle
electrical system, which makes sense with the current crop of 12 Vdc HF rigs on the
market. Or, you could operate from 120 Vac generated by a light plant generator.
When boondocking in a four-wheeler (or other vehicle), it is wise to use a dual
battery system such as shown in Fig. 25-9. Two separate 12-Vdc auto batteries
(preferably high ampere-hour capacity) are connected essentially in parallel with
the alternative charging system. Diodes D1 and D2 are rated at 100 A, 50 V peak inverse voltage (PVI), and are used to isolate the two batteries from each other. Diode
assemblies such as this can be built, or purchased from van conversion and recreational

Chap25_Carr

4/10/01

3:49 PM

Page 494

494 Mobile, emergency, portable, and marine antennas
From
alternator

D1

B1


D2

B2


25-9 Diode pack allows charging two batteries from system charger.

vehicle shops. Van and RV owners’ use is the same as yours: It’s a darn shame to run
down the battery needed to start the vehicle just by operating your rig. You not only
cannot start the vehicle in such a case, but cannot muster enough power to call for
the wilderness equivalent of “Triple A.”
One experienced boondocker I met in southern Arizona totes either a 450-W
Kawasaki or 500-W Honda mini light plant generator in the back of his Bronco. These
models are surprisingly lightweight and quiet operating. One of the generators has a
12-Vdc, 8-A outlet that can be used to charge a dead battery. The other has only the
110-Vac outlet, but can be used for battery charging if a small charger is provided.
Simple 10-A battery chargers can usually be bought at auto parts or accessories
stores, for about $60.
Operating radio communications equipment successfully under primitive conditions depends upon two major factors: available electrical power and a proper, efficient, antenna system. Although dealing in detail with the means of obtaining power
in remote locations is beyond the scope of this book, we have provided some ideas
from which you can start planning your own “survival” radio system.

Marine radio antennas
Radio communications considerably lessened the dangers inherent in sea travel. So
much so, in fact, that the maritime industry took to the new “wireless telegraphy”
earlier than any other segment of society. In the early days of radio, a number of exciting rescues occurred because of wireless. Even the infamous S.S. Titanic sinking
might have cost less human life if the wireless operator aboard a nearby ship had

Chap25_Carr

4/10/01

3:49 PM

Page 495

Marine radio antennas 495
been on duty. Today, shore stations and ships maintain 24-hour surveillance, and
vessels can be equipped with autoalarm devices to wake up those who are not on
duty. Even small pleasure boats are now equipped with radio communications, and
these are monitored around the clock by the U.S. Coast Guard.
The small shipboard operator can have a selection of either HF single-sideband
communications or VHF-FM communications. The general rule is that a station must
have the VHF-FM, and can be licensed for the HF SSB mode only if VHF-FM is also
aboard. The VHF-FM radio is used in coastal waters, inland waters, and harbors. These
radios are equipped with a high/low power switch that permits the use of low power
(1 W typically) in the harbor, but higher power when under way. The HF SSB radios are
more powerful (100 W typically), and are used for offshore long-distance communications beyond the line-of-radio-sight capability of the VHF-FM band.
The problems of antennas on boats are the same as for shore installations, but
are aggravated by certain factors. Space, for one thing, is less on a boat so most HF
antennas must be compensation types. Also, grounds are harder to come by on a
fiberglass or wooden boat, so external grounds must be provided.
A typical powerboat example is shown in Fig. 25-10. The radio is connected to a
whip antenna through a transmission line (and a tuner on HF), while also being
grounded to an externally provided groundplate. Over the years, radio grounds have
taken a lot of different forms. For example, the ground might be copper or aluminum
foil cemented to the boat hull. Alternatively, it might be a bronze plate or hollow
bronze tube along the center line of the boat, or along the sides just below the water
line. The ground will also be connected to the engine. Careful attention must be paid

Antenna

Radio
Engine

Foil

Bronze plate
25-10 Motorboat grounding system.

Chap25_Carr

4/10/01

3:49 PM

Page 496

496 Mobile, emergency, portable, and marine antennas
to the electrical system of the boat when creating external grounds to prevent electrolytic corrosion from inadvertent current flows.
On sailboats the whip antenna (especially VHF-FM) might be mast-mounted as
shown in Fig. 25-11. The same grounding scheme applies with the addition of a metal
keel or metal foil over a nonmetallic keel.
The whips used for boat radios tend to be longer than land mobile antennas for the
same frequency. The VHF-FM whip (Fig. 25-12) can be several quarter-wavelengths
and take advantage of gain characteristics thereby obtained. Whips for the HF bands
tend to be 10 to 30 ft in length, and often look like trolling rods on power boats. You will
also see Citizens Band radios on board boats, and the CB antennas are also whips. It is
not a good idea to rely solely on CB for boat communications, because it is a lot less

Whip

Radio

Metal
foil
Metal
keel
25-11 Sailboat grounding.

Chap25_Carr

4/10/01

3:49 PM

Page 497

Marine radio antennas 497

25-12 VHF-FM boat antenna.
Courtesy of Antenna Specialist Company

likely to be useful in emergencies. Also, some boaters use amateur radio sets, often
illegally, for emergency communications in lieu of a proper HF-SSB unit.
Longwire antennas also find use in marine service. Figure 25-13 shows two installations. The antenna in Fig. 25-13A shows a wire stretched between the stern and bow
by way of the mast. The antenna is end-fed from an antenna tuner or “line flattener.”
The longwire shown in Fig. 25-13B is similar in concept, but runs from the bottom to
the top of the mast. Again, a tuner is needed to match the antenna to the radio transmission line. Notice that the antennas used in this manner are actually not “longwires”
in the truly rigorous sense of the term, but rather “random length” antennas.
The format of the tuner can be any of several designs, shown in Fig. 25-14. The
reversed L-section coupler shown in Fig. 25-14A is used when the antenna radiator element is less than a quarter-wavelength. Similarly, when the antenna is greater than
a quarter-wavelength, the circuit of Fig. 25-14B is the tuner of choice. This circuit is a
modified L-section coupler that uses two variable capacitors and the inductor.

Chap25_Carr

4/10/01

3:49 PM

Page 498

498 Mobile, emergency, portable, and marine antennas

25-13A Sailboat HF
antenna.

Radio Tuner

Mast

Wire

25-13B Mast antenna.

Tuner

Radio

Chap25_Carr

4/10/01

3:49 PM

Page 499

Marine radio antennas 499

B

A




4




4

L1

C1
C2

C

25-14 Antenna tuners for
broad HF antennas.

L2
L1
28 H

Finally, we see in Fig. 25-14C the coupler used on many radios for randomlength antennas. Two variable inductors are used; L1 is used to resonate the antenna,
and L2 is used to match the impedance looking back to the transmitter to the system
impedance. In some designs, the inductors are not actually variable, but rather use
switch-selected taps on the coils. The correct coil taps are selected when the operator selects a channel. This approach is less frequently encountered today, when frequency synthesizers give the owner a selection of channels to use. In those cases,
either the antenna must be tuned every time the frequency is changed, or an automatic (or motor-driven) preselected tuner is used.

Chap25_Carr

4/10/01

3:49 PM

Page 500

500 Mobile, emergency, portable, and marine antennas
The line flattener (Fig. 25-15) is a standard transmatch antenna tuner that
flattens coaxial-cable transmission line for VSWR. This type of tuner is especially
useful for transmitters with solid-state finals that are not “happy” with high VSWR.
Some of those designs incorporate shutdown circuits that reduce (and then cut
off) power as the VSWR increases. The line flattener basically tunes out the VSWR
at the transmitter. It does nothing to tune the antenna, but only makes the transmitter operable.
C1
250 pF

C2
250 pF
Antenna

Xcvr

L1
33 H

25-15 Line flattener tuner.

26

CHAPTER

Antennas for lowfrequency operation
LOW-FREQUENCY OPERATION (E.G., 160- AND 75/80-METER BAND) POSES CERTAIN

difficulties for the antenna. Of course, the first thing that springs to mind is
the large size of those antennas. A half-wavelength dipole is between 117 and
133 ft long on 75/80 m, and on 160 m it is about twice that length. On my own suburban lot, I cannot erect a half-wave 75/80-m band antenna and stay within the
property lines.
A similar situation is seen with vertical antennas. Although a 40-m vertical (33 ft
high) is not an unreasonable mechanical job, the 66 ft 75/80-m vertical (never mind
the 120-ft 160-m vertical) is a nightmare. In addition, the local authorities might not
require any special inspections or permits (check!) on the 33-ft antenna, yet impose
rigid and very exacting requirements on the higher structure. On suburban or urban
lots, a typical 40-m antenna might well be able to fall over and still not cross the
property line—or come in close proximity to power lines. A longer antenna, however, almost inevitably suffers one—or the other—problem when it falls.

Grounding
Still another problem involves grounding. The ground system of a higher-frequency
vertical antenna can be installed using λ/4 radials buried a few inches below the surface. But that same idea becomes problematic when the radials are 66 or 125 ft long.
Burying half a dozen 125-ft radials might remind your neighbors of the Galloping
Gung-Ho Gopher—and not to their amusement!
There are, however, some solutions to the problem—without having you buy
a farm in the flatter regions of the midwest. For example, the length problem can
be solved by using one of the bent dipoles covered in Chap. 10. No, they are not

Copyright 2001 - the McGraw-Hill Companies

501

Chap26_Carr

4/10/01

4:05 PM

Page 502

502 Antennas for low-frequency operation
as effective as an antenna that is correctly installed. But they will serve to get you
on the air. Some of them work surprisingly well.
The ground radial problem can be solved by bending the radial system around
your property (Fig. 26-1). You will never have to cross your neighbor’s line. And, as
for the gopher track appearance, it is not necessary to work sloppily, and you can install radials so that nary an eye, practiced or otherwise, can see their location.

Shortened vertical antennas
The biggest problem for most low-frequency DXers, as you have seen, is the excessive size of antennas for those frequencies; it is “not for nothing” that those AM
broadcast band (<1.6 MHz) towers are usually hundreds of feet tall. But there are
ways to shorten an antenna—not for free, because the TANSTAAFL* principle still
Possible
radial
patterns

Property
lines

Fence

Fence
House

26-1 Methods for laying out low-frequency radials in a cramped space.
* TANSTAAFL = There ain’t no such thing as a free lunch!

Chap26_Carr

4/10/01

4:05 PM

Page 503

Shortened vertical antennas 503
applies—to a point where it becomes mechanically possible. Let me reiterate once
again that these compensation antennas will not work as well as a properly installed
full-sized antenna, but they will serve to get you on the air on frequencies where it is
otherwise utterly impossible. Several different compensation configurations are
popular, and these are shown in Fig. 26-2.

To XMTR

To XMTR

A

B

To XMTR

D

To XMTR

C

To XMTR

E

26-2 Inductance loading of vertical antennas: (A) center; (B) top; (C) base;
(D) linear or length-loaded; (E) linear hairpin-loaded.

Chap26_Carr

4/10/01

4:05 PM

Page 504

504 Antennas for low-frequency operation
The basic foundation for these antennas is a very short vertical antenna. The
“standard” vertical antenna is a quarter-wavelength (λ/4) (i.e., 90° electrical length),
and it is unbalanced with respect to ground.
Recall that a vertical antenna that is too short for its operating frequency (i.e.,
less than λ/4) will exhibit capacitive reactance. In order to resonate that antenna, it
is necessary to cancel the capacitive reactance with an equivalent inductive reactance, such as XL = XC. By placing an inductance in series with the antenna radiator element, therefore, we can effectively “lengthen” it electrically. Of course,
what is really happening is that the effects of the lower operating frequency are being accommodated (i.e., “cancelled out”) of a too-short antenna.
An antenna that is reactance-compensated for a different frequency is said to be
loaded, or in the case of a very low frequency antenna, inductively loaded. Three
basic forms of loading are popular: discrete loading, continuous loading, and linear loading.
Discrete loading means that there is a discrete, or lumped, inductance in series
with the antenna radiator (Figs. 26-2A through 26-2C). These antennas are so constructed that a loading coil is placed at the center (Fig. 26-2A), top (Fig. 26-2B), or
bottom (Fig. 26-2C) of the radiator element.
You will recognize these configurations as being the same as those found on mobile antennas. Indeed, low-band mobile antennas can be used in both mobile and
fixed installations. Note, however, that although it is convenient to use mobile antennas for fixed locations (because they are easily available in “store bought” form);
they are less efficient than other versions of the same concept. The reason is that the
mobile antenna, for low frequencies, tends to be based on the standard 96- to 102-in
whip antenna used by amateur operators on 10 m or Citizens Band operators on 11 m.
In fixed locations, on the other hand, longer radiator elements (which are more efficient) are more easily handled. For example, a 16- to 30-ft high aluminum radiator
element can easily be constructed of readily available materials. The 16-ft element
can be bought in the form of one or two lengths of 1- to 1.5-in aluminum tubing at
do-it-yourself outlets.
A problem seen with these antennas is that they tend to be rather high Q, so the
bandwidth is necessarily narrow. An antenna might work in the center of a band, but
present a high VSWR at the ends of the band, and thus be unusable. This problem is
solved by making the inductor variable so that slightly different inductance values
can be selected at different frequencies across the band. For the base-loaded version
(Fig. 26-2C), this is particularly easy: a rotary inductor (perhaps motor driven for remote operation) can be used. For the other configurations, a tapped fixed inductor
can be used instead. Each tap represents a different inductance value. Either clip
connectors, or relay connections, can be used to select which tap is used.
A continuously loaded antenna has the inductance distributed along the entire
length of the radiator (Fig. 26-2D). Typical of these antennas is the helically wound
verticals in which about a half-wavelength of insulated wire is wound over an insulating form (such as a length of PVC pipe or a wooden dowel); the turns of the coil
are spread out over the entire length of the insulated support.
Linear loading (Fig. 26-2E) is an arrangement whereby a section of the antenna is folded back on itself like a stub. Antennas of this sort have been successfully

Chap26_Carr

4/10/01

4:05 PM

Page 505

Shortened horizontal antennas 505
built from the same type of aluminum tubing as regular verticals. For 75/80-m
(3.75-MHz) operation a length of 30 ft for the radiator represents 41°, while a normal λ/4 vertical is 90°. The difference between 90° and 41° of electrical length is
made up by the “hairpin” structure at the base.

Shortened horizontal antennas
The same strategies that worked for vertical antennas also work for horizontal antennas, although in the horizontal case we are simulating a half wavelength (180°)
balanced antenna—rather than a λ/4 unbalanced antenna. Figure 26-3 shows several
different shortened, low frequency antennas that are based on the same methods as
the verticals shown previously.
Figures 26-3A through 26-3C show discretely loaded dipole antennas. Figures
26-3A and 26-3B are center-loaded versions, and Fig. 26-3C is a center (of each element) -loaded version. In each case, it is assumed that the radiator elements are the
same physical length. In the example of Fig. 26-3A, the coil is tapped to provide a
match to either 52- or 75-Ω transmission line. In some variants, the shield of the
coaxial-cable transmission line is connected directly to the junction of the coil and
one radiator element, and the coax center conductor is connected to the tap that
best matches the impedance of the line.
The impedance-matching problem is solved a little differently in Fig. 26-3B. In this
type of antenna, the coil is used to center-load the dipole, but the transmission line is
connected to a link wound on the same form as the loading inductor. The turns ratio between the loading inductor and the coupling link determines the impedance match.
A “hairpin” linear loading scheme is shown in Fig. 26-3D. This design is basically
the same as for the vertical case, but it is balanced out of respect for the design of
the dipole. This type of design is used for both the driven and parasitic elements on
some commercial 40-m beam antennas. In addition, some “add-on” 40-m dipoles
(designed for beam antennas that were intended for operation at frequencies in the
20-m and higher bands) use this method. Such antennas are essentially rotatable
dipoles.
The continuously loaded dipole of Fig. 26-3E is constructed like the helical vertical (i.e., about a half-wavelength of insulated wire is wound over the entire length
of an insulated rod or pipe of some sort). The winding can be either broken at its
center point to accommodate the feedline, or link-coupled to the transmitter, or receiver, as shown in Fig. 26-3F. Of the two feed methods, the most popular appears to
be the type that breaks the winding into two pieces.
The form of continuously loaded dipole in Fig. 26-3E has a combination of the
two methods of feed. The distributed loading coil is broken into two sections, as
is often done on continuously loaded dipoles. But in this case, a portion of the
overall inductance is made by using a discrete inductor that is part of a toroidal
transformer T1. The length of the wire used for the continuous loading coil is
somewhat shorter (find by experimentation) than otherwise would be the case
because of the inductance of the transformer secondary. Transformer T1 can be
wound using the same sort of toroidal ferrite or powdered iron core used for
Balun transformers.

Chap26_Carr

4/10/01

4:05 PM

Page 506

506 Antennas for low-frequency operation

To XMTR

A

To XMTR

B

To XMTR

C

To XMTR

D
To XMTR

E
T1

To XMTR

F
26-3 Inductance loading of a dipole: (A) center loading with impedance tapped coil;
(B) center loading with transformer coupling; (C) loading at center of elements; (D) linear loading (hairpin); (E) linear or length loading; (F) transformer coupling.

Chap26_Carr

4/10/01

4:05 PM

Page 507

Random-length Marconi 507

Loaded tower designs
Many amateur radio stations and other services use a rotatable beam antenna on top
of a tower. Typical towers are from 30 to 120 ft in height. In my locality, towers to 30 ft,
or less than 3 ft above the roof line, whichever is taller, can be erected without a permit as long as they are attached to the house and will not fall onto a power line, or
across the property line, in a catastrophic failure. Higher towers must be erected under a mechanical permit, and properly inspected by the county. These towers typically support a two-element (or more, three is popular) Yagi /Uda beam antenna, or
a quad, or some other highly directional antenna. But they can also be treated as a
vertical antenna under the right circumstances.
If the tower is close to 66 ft high (which is a popular height for amateur radio
towers), then the tower (already λ/4) can be used as a resonant vertical on 75/80 m.
The same tower can also be used on lower frequencies if proper antenna tuning unit
(ATU) components are provided.
Figure 26-4 shows a situation in which an 80- to 110-ft tower is insulated from
ground, and is considered a random-length vertically polarized Marconi antenna.
Like other such antennas, it is fed by a simple L-section, or reverse L-section, ATU.
Note the approximate values of the inductors and capacitors in each configuration,
and also their relationships. On the 40- and 75/80-m versions, the tower is too long,
so a series capacitance and shunt inductance are used for the ATU (i.e., Reverse Lsection coupler). On the other hand, the tower is too short for 160 m, so the inductor and capacitor are reversed.
There is only one small problem with the design of Fig. 26-4: Compared with
grounded towers, insulated towers are expensive to buy and install. In addition,
lightning protection is probably better in the grounded tower. So how do we work a
grounded tower? See Fig. 26-5. In this antenna, the tower is grounded at its base. If
the tower is mounted to a concrete pedestal (the usual arrangement), then a separate ground rod and ground wire adjacent to the pedestal must be provided. Concrete is not a good insulator, but it is also not a good conductor. A delta feed system
is used with this antenna. That is, a single wire from the ATU is connected to a point
on the antenna where an impedance match can be achieved. It is important that the
ATU be spaced away from the tower base (as shown), and the wire must be run
straight to the feedpoint on the antenna. This system is an example of several possible shunt feeding systems.

Random-length Marconi
One of the old standbys for all bands is the random-length Marconi antenna. Such antennas consist of a length of wire, typically (but not always) less than λ/4, and fed at
one end with coaxial cable and an L-section coupler (Fig. 26-6). The antenna radiator
element can be angled in any direction as needed, but it works best if the radiator is
either as horizontal, or vertical, as possible (for pure polarization). The usual situation, however, is to run the wire at an inclined angle, or with about equal portions horizontal and vertical (see the inverted L) which yields complex polarization.

Chap26_Carr

4/10/01

4:05 PM

Page 508

508 Antennas for low-frequency operation

90' tower

6 H

440 pF

160

Tower
insulator

440 pF

75/80

To
XMTR

40

15 H

440 pF

2 H

26-4 Method for impedance matching a tower antenna.

Chap26_Carr

4/10/01

4:05 PM

Page 509

Random-length Marconi 509

Single-conductor feedline
(delta feed)

ATU

Coax to XMTR

26-5 Delta matching a grounded vertical tower antenna.
Rope

Radiator  
4

End insulator

L1

C1

Coupler
(interchange L1 and C1
when antenna  4 )

26-6 Random-length wire antenna.

Chap26_Carr

4/10/01

4:05 PM

Page 510

510 Antennas for low-frequency operation
The L-section coupler shown in Fig. 26-6 is set up for the case where the antenna radiator element is less than λ/4 (i.e., a series inductor and a shunt capacitor).
If the antenna is longer than λ/4 on some frequency, then reverse the positions of the
capacitor and inductor.

Inverted-L antennas
Another popular antenna for low frequencies is the λ/4 inverted-L (Fig. 26-7). In
this type of antenna, two sections are erected at a 90° angle with respect to each
other; one vertical and the other horizontal. One way to think of this antenna is bent
λ/4 vertical, although some people liken it to a top-loaded vertical. The feedline can
be 52- or 75-Ω coaxial cable.
It is generally the case that the sections of the inverted-L are equal in length (λ/8
each), but that is not strictly necessary. As the vertical section becomes longer (with
overall length remaining at λ/4), the angle of radiation depresses.
One popular method of construction is to use a tower for the vertical section,
and a run of wire for the horizontal section. If you already have a 60-ft tower to accommodate the beam antenna used on higher frequencies, then it is relatively easy
to build an inverted-L antenna for 160 m.

 8
Rope

End insulator

 8

To
XMTR

26-7 L-section quarter-wavelength antenna.

Chap26_Carr

4/10/01

4:05 PM

Page 511

Random-length Marconi 511

The linearly loaded “tee” antenna
A “tee” antenna consists of a horizontal radiator element fed at the center with a single conductor wire (not coax) that is a quarter-wavelength long, and goes away from
the radiator at a right angle. Such antennas were popular prior to World War II in the
United States, although popularity fell off in the late 1930s as other types (and reasonably priced transmission lines) became available. The tee is possibly one of the
oldest forms of radio transmitting antennas. Like other antennas at low frequencies,
however, it is far too long for easy use in most locations.
We can, however, linearly load the tee by folding the ends of the radiator back on
themselves to form the zigzag pattern of Fig. 26-8. Popular in Europe for some time,
this antenna can provide reasonable performance on the lower frequencies without
using too much horizontal space.
The radiator element consists of three sections that are each about λ/6 long
(L1 = 164/FMHz), and spaced 8 to 12 in apart; they are parallel to each other. The
quarter-wavelength transmission line is connected to the center point of the middle section of the radiator element.
Figure 26-9 shows how the linearly loaded tee antenna could be built using wire
for the radiator elements. Spreaders made of 24-in-long 1 × 2-in lumber (treated
against the weather), plastic, or some other synthetic material can be used. Each
spreader has three holes drilled in it spaced about 10 in apart. Spreaders A and E are
end spreaders, and are identical—except for being upside down with respect to each
other. In each case, one of the radiator element conductor sections is terminated,
while the other passes through to the back of the spreader to join the center radiator element. The other spreaders are used either for center support, as in C (note
the transmission line attachment), or for interim support between the center insulator and the end insulators.

Chap26_Carr

4/10/01

4:05 PM

Page 512

512 Antennas for low-frequency operation

L1

S
S


4

ATU

L1 

164
FMHz

246


4
FMHz
26-8 Tee-loaded antenna.

To XMTR

Chap26_Carr

4/10/01

4:05 PM

Page 513

Random-length Marconi 513
Wire

Screw eye
A

B

C

D

E

Screw eye

Wire
Spreaders

 to ATCU
4

26-9 Shortened tee antenna.

Tie
wire

This page intentionally left blank

27

CHAPTER

Measurements and
adjustment techniques
THIS CHAPTER EXAMINES SOME OF THE INSTRUMENTS AND TECHNIQUES FOR TESTING

antenna systems, whether brand new installations, or in troubleshooting situations
on older antenna. The basic radio system is shown in Fig. 27-1. We have several elements in the system: transmitter, low-pass filter, impedance-matching unit, a coaxial
relay if the receiver is separate from the transmitter, and the antenna. Connecting
these elements are lengths of transmission line. In most modern radio systems below
the microwaves, the transmission line is coaxial cable.
The low-pass filter and matching unit may be considered optional by some, but
some designers regard them as essentially standard equipment, especially for HF
and low-band VHF systems. The low-pass filter has the job of removing harmonics
from the output signal that could interfere with other radio systems or radio and TV
broadcast reception. It will pass only those frequencies below a certain cutoff point.
The impedance matching unit is used to “tune out” impedance mismatches that
cause the transmitter to see an excessive VSWR. These units are common in VLF,
MW, and HF communications stations, as well as AM broadcasting stations. The
matching unit also provides additional attenuation of the harmonics, so it makes the
output even cleaner than is possible with the low-pass filter alone.
Another reason to use the matching unit is to allow the radio transmitter to
put out the maximum allowable RF power. Modern solid-state final amplifiers are
not tolerant of VSWR. In addition, these units use fixed-tuned low-pass filters for
each band rather than the wide-range pi networks common on vacuum tube
transmitters. Solid-state transmitters usually include a feedback automatic load
control (ALC) that reduces output power when a high VSWR is sensed. The
VSWR cut-in knee begins around 1.5:1 and completely shuts off the transmitter
when the VSWR gets high (typically above 2.5:1 or 3:1). The external T/R relay is
not used on most modern systems because the receiver and transmitter are typically housed inside of the same box. The coaxial relay was used in days past, when
Copyright 2001 - the McGraw-Hill Companies

515

Chap27_Carr

4/10/01

4:03 PM

Page 516

516 Measurements and adjustment techniques

Transmission line

Antenna

Receiver

T/R
relay

Low-pass
filter

Impedance
matching
unit

Transmitter

27-1 Basic communications radio station setup.

a separate receiver needed to use the same antenna. In addition, many modern
solid-state equipments use PIN diode T/R switching.

Transmission lines
The transmission line is not merely a wire that carries RF power to the antenna. It is
actually a complex circuit that simulates an infinite LC network. There is a characteristic impedance Zo, also called surge impedance, which describes each transmission line. This impedance is the square root of the ratio of the capacitance and
inductance per unit of length. When a load having a “resistive-only” impedance equal
to the surge impedance of the transmission line is connected, then we will see maximum transfer of power between the line and the antenna.
We cannot deal extensively with transmission-line theory here, and refer the
reader instead to previous chapters. We must, however, have at least some idea of
what the circuit looks like. Figure 27-2 shows a model of a transmission line in which
Zo is the surge impedance of the line, R1 is the load impedance of the antenna, and
R2 is the output impedance of the transmitter. In a properly designed system all
three impedances either will be equal (Zo = R1 = R2) or a matching network will
make them equal.
We must consider the electrical situation along the transmission line in order to
understand the readings that we see on our instruments. Figure 27-3 shows several
possible situations. These graphs are of the RF voltage along the line, with voltage on
the vertical axis and transmission line length (expressed in wavelengths of the RF
signal) along the horizontal axis. When the system is matched (Zo = R1), the voltage

Chap27_Carr

4/10/01

4:03 PM

Page 517

Calculating standing wave ratio 517
L

R1
In

C

L

C

L

C

Zo

R2
Out

L
L  Inductance per unit length
C  Capacitance per unit length

27-2 Equivalent circuit of transmission line.

is the same everywhere along the line (Fig. 27-3A). This line is said to be “flat.” But
when Zo and R2 are not equal, then the voltage varies along the line with wavelength.
In mismatched systems, not all of the power is radiated by the antenna, but rather is
reflected back to the transmitter. The forward and reflected waves combine algebraically at each point along the line to form standing waves (Fig. 27-3B). We can
plot the voltage maxima (Vmax) and minima (Vmin). Keep this graph in mind for a few
minutes because you will refer again to it when we deal with VSWR.
Two special situations occur in transmission line and antenna systems that yield
similar results. The entire forward power is reflected back to the transmitter (none
radiated) if the load (i.e., antenna) end of the transmission line is either open or
shorted. The voltage plot for an open transmission line (R2 is infinite) is shown in
Fig. 27-3C, and that for the shorted line is shown in Fig. 27-3D. Note that they are
very similar to each other except for where the minima (Vmin = 0) occur. The minima
are offset from each other by 90° (i.e., quarter-wavelength).

Calculating standing wave ratio
The VSWR can be calculated from any of several bits of knowledge. Even if you don’t
have a VSWR meter, therefore, it is possible to determine VSWR. If the antenna load impedance (R2) is not equal to Zo, then we can calculate VSWR from one of the following:
If Zo is greater than R2:
Zo
VSWR = 
R2

[27.1]

R2
VSWR = 
Zo

[27.2]

If Zo is less than R2:

Chap27_Carr

4/10/01

4:03 PM

Page 518

518 Measurements and adjustment techniques
V
ZL  Z o

A
0
Load
end
V


4


2

3
4



Toward
source


4


2

3
4



Toward
source


4


2

3
4



Toward
source


4


2

3
4



Toward
source

ZL  Z o

B
0
Load
end
V
ZL  

C
0
Load
end
V Z 0
L

D
0
Load
end

27-3 Voltage along line versus line electrical length: (A) flat line with matched impedance;
(B) unequal impedances; (C) open load; (D) shorted load.

Chap27_Carr

4/10/01

4:03 PM

Page 519

Impedance bridges 519
We can also measure the forward and reflected power, and calculate the VSWR
from those readings:
1 + (P
rP
/ 
f)
VSWR = 
1 – (P
rP
/
f)

[27.3]

where
VSWR is the voltage standing wave ratio
Pr is the reflected power
Pf is the forward power
If we can measure either the voltage maximum and minimum, or the current
maximum and minimum, then we can calculate SWR:
Vmax
VSWR = 
Vmin

[27.4]

Finally, if the forward and reflected voltage components at any given point on
the transmission line can be measured, then we can calculate the VSWR from:
Vf + Vr
VSWR = 
Vf – Vr

[27.5]

where
Vf is the forward voltage component
Vr is the reflected voltage
The last equation, based on the forward and reflected voltages, is the basis for
many modern VSWR and RF power meters.

Impedance bridges
We can make antenna impedance measurements using a variant of the old-fashioned
Wheatstone bridge. Figure 27-4A shows the basic form of the bridge in its most generalized form. The current flowing in the meter will be zero when (Z1/Z2) = (Z3/Z4).
If one arm of the bridge is the antenna impedance, then we can adjust the others
to make the bridge null to make the measurement. A typical example is shown in
Fig. 27-4B. The antenna connected to J2 is one arm of the bridge, while R2 is a second. The value of R2 should be 50 Ω or 75 Ω, depending upon the value of the
expected antenna impedance. The choice of 68 Ω is a good compromise for meters
to operate on both types of antennas. The other two arms of the bridge are the reactances of C1A and C1B, which is a single differential capacitor. Tune C1 until the meter is nulled, and then read the antenna from the dial. At least one instrument allows
the technician to plug in a resistor element equal to system impedance.
Calibrating the instrument is simple. A series of noninductive carbon composition
resistors having standard values from 10 to 1000 Ω are connected across J2. The meter
is then nulled, and the value of the load resistor is inscribed on the dial at the point.

Chap27_Carr

4/10/01

4:03 PM

Page 520

Z

Z3

1

520 Measurements and adjustment techniques

Detector

Z2

Z

4

RF
source

27-4A Basic Wheatstone bridge.

J1
RF
input

R2
68 
R1
4.7 k

J2
Antenna

C1A

CR1
1N60

C1B

R3
10 k
RFC1
1 mH
C2
0.01 F

27-4B SWR bridge.

M1
0–100 A dc
meter

Chap27_Carr

4/10/01

4:03 PM

Page 521

The RF noise bridge 521
The basic circuit of Fig. 27-4B is useful only to measure the resistive component
of impedance. We can modify the circuit as shown in Fig. 27-4C to account for the reactive component. An example of a commercial hand-held radio antenna impedance
bridge is shown in Fig. 27-5.

The RF noise bridge
This section explores a device that was once associated only with engineering laboratories, but turns out to have applications in general communications servicing as
well: the RF noise bridge. It is one of the most useful, low-cost, and often overlooked test instruments in our armamentarium.
Several companies have produced low-cost noise bridges: Omega-T, Palomar
Engineers, The Heath Company, and, most recently, MFJ. The Omega-T and the
Palomar Engineers models are shown in Fig. 27-5. The Omega-T device is a small
cube with minimal dials, and a pair of BNC coax connectors (antenna and receiver). The dial is calibrated in ohms, and measures only the resistive component
of impedance. The Palomar Engineers device is a little less eye appealing, but does
everything the Omega-T does; in addition, it allows you to make a rough measurement of the reactive component of impedance. The Heath Company added their
Model HD-1422 to the lineup. And the latest entry is the MFJ-204B antenna bridge.
Over the years, some people have found the noise bridge very useful for a variety of test and measurement applications, especially in the HF and low-VHF regions.
R2
68 

L1
balance

27-4C Circuit with balance
control added.

27-5 Commercially available amateur noise bridges.

J2
C3
140 pF

Chap27_Carr

4/10/01

4:03 PM

Page 522

522 Measurements and adjustment techniques
Those applications are not limited to the testing of antennas (which is the main job
of the noise bridge). In fact, although the two-way technician (including CB) or amateur radio operator, will measure antennas, tuned circuits, and resonant cavities
with the device, consumer electronics technicians will find other applications.
Figure 27-6 shows the circuit of a noise bridge instrument. The bridge consists
of four arms. The inductive arms (L1b and L1c) form a trifilar wound transformer over
a ferrite core with L1a, so a signal applied to L1a is injected into the bridge circuit. The
measurement consists of a series circuit of a 200-Ω potentiometer and a 120-pF variable capacitor. The potentiometer sets the range (0 to 200 Ω) of the resistive component of measured impedance, while the capacitor sets the reactance component.
Capacitor C2 in the unknown arm of the bridge is used to balance the measurement
capacitor. With C2 in the circuit, the bridge is balanced when C is approximately in
the center of its range. This arrangement accommodates both inductive and capacitive reactances, which appear on either side of the “zero” point (i.e., the midrange
capacitance of C). When the bridge is in balance, the settings of R and C reveal the
impedance across the unknown terminal.
A reverse-biased zener diode (zeners normally operate in the reverse-bias mode)
produces a large amount of noise because of the avalanche process inherent in zener operation. Although this noise is a problem in many other applications, in a noise bridge it
is highly desirable: the richer the noise spectrum the better the performance. The spec-

B1
9 Vdc



C10

 4.7 F

C3
R5
1500 k 0.01 F

8
R1
6800 k
D1, D2,
IN914
or
IN4148

4 3

C2
0.02 F
5

7

IC1
555
timer 1

D1 6

2
D2

R2
6800 

C1
0.01 F

R6
680 
R7
10 k

C8
C5
250 pF
0.01 F
reactance
T1

Q2
ECG-222

{

R5
C9 1000 
0.1 F
R4
22 k

R8
200 
linear
type-AB
J2
RCVR

Q1
ECG-222

D3
6.8 Vdc
(noise source)

T1: toroid trifilar
transformer
10T, no. 26 over
FT-50-43 core

27-6 Noise bridge circuit.

C6
40 pF
balance

C7
100 pF
S.M.

Antenna
J1

Chap27_Carr

4/10/01

4:03 PM

Page 523

The RF noise bridge 523
trum is enhanced because of the 1-kHz square-wave modulator that chops the noise signal. An amplifier boosts the noise signal to the level needed in the bridge circuit.
The detector used in the noise bridge is a tunable receiver covering the frequencies of interest. The preferable receiver uses an AM demodulator, but both CW
(morse code) and SSB receivers will do in a pinch. The quality of the receiver depends entirely on the precision with which you need to know the operating frequency of the device under test.

Adjusting antennas
Perhaps the most common use for the antenna noise bridge is finding the impedance
and resonant points of an HF antenna. Connect the receiver terminal of the bridge
to the antenna input of the HF receiver through a short length of coaxial cable as
shown in Fig. 27-7. The length should be as short as possible, and the characteristic
impedance should match that of the antenna feedline. Next, connect the coaxial
feedline from the antenna to the antenna terminals on the bridge. You are now
ready to test the antenna.
Set the noise bridge resistance control to the antenna feedline impedance (usually 50 to 75 Ω for most common antennas). Set the reactance control to midrange
(zero). Next, tune the receiver to the expected resonant frequency (Fexp) of the
antenna. Turn the noise bridge on, look for a noise signal of about S9 (will vary on
different receivers), and if—in the unlikely event that the antenna is resonant on the
expected frequency—you will find yourself right in the middle of the null.
Adjust the resistance control R on the bridge for a null, i.e., minimum noise as indicated by the S meter. Next, adjust the resistance control C for a null. Repeat the adjustments of the R and C controls for the deepest possible null, as indicated by the lowest
noise output on the S meter (there is some interaction between the two controls).
Antenna
Under Test

14250

Ant

Antenna

RCVR
X

Noise
Bridge

27-7 Connection of noise bridge.

R

Chap27_Carr

4/10/01

4:03 PM

Page 524

524 Measurements and adjustment techniques
A perfectly resonant antenna will have a reactance reading of zero ohms, and a
resistance of 50 to 75 Ω. Real antennas might have some reactance (the less the better), and a resistance that is somewhat different from 50 to 75 Ω. Impedance-matching methods can be used to transform the actual resistive component to the 50- or
75-Ω characteristic impedance of the transmission line. The results to expect:
1. If the resistance is close to zero, then suspect that there is a short circuit on
the transmission line. Suspect an open circuit if the resistance is close to 200
Ω.
2. A reactance reading on the XL side of zero indicates that the antenna is too long,
while a reading on the XC side of zero indicates an antenna that is too short.
An antenna that is too long or too short should be adjusted to the correct length.
To determine the correct length, we must find the actual resonant frequency Fr. To
do this, reset the reactance control to zero, and then slowly tune the receiver in the
proper direction—downband for too long and upband for too short—until the null is
found. On a high-Q antenna, the null is easy to miss if you tune too fast. Don’t be surprised if that null is out of band by quite a bit. The percentage of change is given by
dividing the expected resonant frequency Fexp by the actual resonant frequency Fr,
and multiply by 100:
Fexp × 100%
Change = 
Fr

[27.6]

Connect the antenna, noise bridge, and receiver in the same manner as above.
Set the receiver to the expected resonant frequency (i.e., approximately 468/F for
half-wavelength types and 234/F for quarter-wavelength types). Set the resistance
control to 50 Ω or 75 Ω, as appropriate for the normal antenna impedance and the
transmission line impedance. Set the reactance control to zero. Turn the bridge on
and listen for the noise signal.
Slowly rock the reactance control back and forth to find on which side of zero
the null appears. Once the direction of the null is determined, set the reactance control to zero, and then tune the receiver toward the null direction (downband if null
is on XL side and upband if it is on the XC side of zero).
A less-than-ideal antenna will not have exactly 50- or 75-Ω impedance, so some
adjustment of R and C to find the deepest null is in order. You will be surprised how
far off some dipoles and other forms of antennas can be if they are not in “free
space,” (i.e., if they are close to the earth’s surface).

Nonresonant antenna adjustment
We can operate antennas on frequencies other than their resonant frequency if we
know the impedance:
55
XC = X =  – 2340
68 – C

[27.7]

159,155
XL = X = 2340 – 
68 + C

[27.8]

or

Chap27_Carr

4/10/01

4:03 PM

Page 525

The RF noise bridge 525
Now, plug “X” calculated from Eq. 27.7 or 27.8 into Xf = X/F where F is the desired frequency in MHz.

Other jobs
The noise bridge can be used for a variety of jobs. We can find the values of capacitors and inductors, determine the characteristics of series- and parallel-tuned resonant circuits, and adjust transmission lines.
Transmission line measurements Some antennas and non-noise measurements require antenna feedlines that are either a quarter-wavelength or half-wavelength at some specific frequency. In other cases, a piece of coaxial cable of specified
length is required for other purposes: for instance, the dummy load used to service
depth sounders is nothing but a long piece of shorted coax that returns the echo at
a time interval that corresponds to a specific depth. We can use the bridge to find
these lengths as follows:
1. Connect a short circuit across the unknown terminals and adjust R and X for
the best null at the frequency of interest. (Note: both will be near zero.)
2. Remove the short circuit.
3. Connect the length of transmission line to the unknown terminal—it should
be longer than the expected length.
4. For quarter-wavelength lines, shorten the line until the null is very close to
the desired frequency. For half-wavelength lines, do the same thing, except
that the line must be shorted at the far end for each trial length.
The velocity factor of a transmission line (usually designated by the letter V in
equations) is a decimal fraction that tells us how fast the radio wave propagates
along the line relative to the speed of light in free space. For example, foam dielectric coaxial cable is said to have a velocity factor of V = 0.80. This number means that
the signals in the line travel at a speed 0.80 (or 80 percent) of the speed of light.
Because all radio wavelength formulas are based on the velocity of light, you
need the V value to calculate the physical length needed to equal any given electrical length. For example, a half-wavelength piece of coax has a physical length of
(492 × V)/FMHz feet. Unfortunately, the real value of V is often a bit different from the
published value. You can use the noise bridge to find the actual value of V for any
sample of coaxial cable as follows:
1. Select a convenient length of the coax more than 12 ft in length and install a
PL-259 RF connector (or other connector compatible with your instrument)
on one end, and short-circuit the other end.
2. Accurately measure the physical length of the coax in feet; convert the “remainder” inches to a decimal fraction of a foot by dividing by 12 (e.g., 32 ft 8 in=
32.67 ft because 8 in/12 in = 0.67). Alternatively, cut off the cable to the nearest
foot and reconnect the short circuit.
3. Set the bridge resistance and reactance controls to zero.
4. Adjust the monitor receiver for deepest null. Use the null frequency to find
the velocity factor V = FL/492, where V is the velocity factor (a decimal fraction); F is the frequency in megahertz; and L is the cable length in feet.

Chap27_Carr

4/10/01

4:03 PM

Page 526

526 Measurements and adjustment techniques
Tuned circuit measurements An inductor/capacitor (LC) tuned “tank” circuit is the circuit equivalent of a resonant antenna, so there is some similarity between the two measurements. You can measure resonant frequency with the noise
bridge to within ±20 percent (or better if care is taken). This accuracy might seem
poor, but it is better than you can usually get with low-cost signal generators, dip meters, absorption wavemeters, and the like.
A series tuned circuit exhibits a low impedance at the resonant frequency and
a high impedance at all other frequencies. Start the measurement by connecting the
series tuned circuit under test across the unknown terminals of the dip meter. Set
the resistance control to a low resistance value, close to zero ohms. Set the reactance control at midscale (zero mark). Next, tune the receiver to the expected null
frequency, and then tune for the null. Make sure that the null is at its deepest point
by rocking the R and X controls for best null. At this point, the receiver frequency is
the resonant frequency of the tank circuit.
A parallel resonant circuit exhibits a high impedance at resonance and a low
impedance at all other frequencies. The measurement is made in exactly the same
manner as for the series resonant circuits, except that the connection is different.
Figure 27-8 shows a two-turn link coupling that is needed to inject the noise signal
into the parallel resonant tank circuit. If the inductor is the toroidal type, then the
link must go through the hole in the doughnut-shaped core and then connect to
the unknown terminals on the bridge. After this, proceed exactly as you would for
the series tuned tank measurement.
Capacitance and inductance measurements The bridge requires a 100-pF
silver mica test capacitor and a 4.7-µH test inductor, which are used to measure inductance and capacitance, respectively. The idea is to use the test components to
form a series-tuned resonant circuit with an unknown component. If you find a resonant frequency, then you can calculate the unknown value. In both cases, the series
tuned circuit is connected across the unknown terminals of the dip meter, and the
series tuned procedure is followed.

To noise
bridge
C

27-8 Noise bridge connection
to LC tank circuits.

L

2–3 turn
link

Chap27_Carr

4/10/01

4:03 PM

Page 527

Dip oscillators 527
To measure inductance, connect the 100-pF capacitor in series with the unknown coil across the unknown terminals of the dip meter. When the null frequency
is found, find the inductance from
253
L=
F2

[27.9]

where
L is the inductance, in microhenries
F is the frequency, in megahertz
Connect the test inductor across the unknown terminals in series with the unknown capacitance. Set the resistance control to zero, tune the receiver to 2 MHz,
and readjust the reactance control for null. Without readjusting the noise bridge
control, connect the test inductor in series with the unknown capacitance and retune the receiver for a null. Capacitance can now be calculated from:
5389
C=
F2

[27.10]

where:
C is in picofarads
F is in megahertz

Dip oscillators
One of the most common instruments for determining the resonant frequency of an
antenna is the so-called dip oscillator or dip meter. Originally called the grid dip
meter, the basis for this instrument is the fact that its output energy can be absorbed
by a nearby resonant circuit (or antenna, which is an electrically resonant LC tank
circuit). When the inductor of the dip oscillator (see Fig. 27-9) is brought into

27-9 Dip meter.

Chap27_Carr

4/10/01

4:03 PM

Page 528

528 Measurements and adjustment techniques
close proximity to a resonant tank circuit, and the oscillator is operating on the
resonant frequency, then a small amount of energy is transferred. This energy loss
shows up on the meter pointer as a slight “dipping” action. The dip is extremely
sharp, and is easily missed if the meter frequency dial is tuned too rapidly.
Antennas are resonant circuits, and can be treated in a manner similar to LC
tank circuits. Figure 27-10A shows one way to couple the dip oscillator to a vertical
antenna radiator. The inductor of the dipper is brought into close proximity to the
base of the radiator. Figure 27-10B shows the means for coupling the dip oscillator

Radiator

Dip meter
27-10A Direct coupling the
dip meter to antenna.

Base
insulator

Mount
Dip meter coil

2–3 turn
loop
Coax to antenna
2–3 turn
loop

27-10B Coupling the dip
meter to coaxial
cable.

For antennas with
coax connector at
feedpoint

Chap27_Carr

4/10/01

4:03 PM

Page 529

Selecting and using RF wattmeters and antenna VSWR meters 529
to systems where the radiator is not easily accessed (as when the antenna is still
erected). We connect a small two- or three-turn loop to the transmitter end of the
transmission line, and then bring the inductor of the dipper close to it. A better way
is to connect the loop directly to the antenna feedpoint.
There are two problems with dip meters that must be recognized in order to best
use the instrument. First, the dip is very sharp. It is easy to tune past the dip and not
even see it. To make matters worse, it is normal for the meter reading to drop off
gradually from one end of the tuning range to the other. But if you tune very slowly,
then you will notice a very sharp dip when the resonant point is reached.
The second problem is the dial calibration. The dial gradations of inexpensive
dip meters are too close together and are often erroneous. It is better to monitor the
output of the dip oscillator on a receiver and depend upon the calibration of the receiver for data.

Selecting and using RF wattmeters
and antenna VSWR meters
A key instrument required in checking the performance of, or troubleshooting, radio
transmitters is the RF power meter (or “wattmeter”). These instruments measure the
output power of the transmitter, and display the result in watts, or some related unit.
Closely related to RF wattmeters is the antenna VSWR meter. This instrument also examines the output of the transmitter and gives a relative indication of output power. It
can be calibrated to display the dimensionless units of voltage standing wave ratio.
Many modern instruments, a couple of which will be covered as examples in this chapter, combine both RF power and VSWR measurement capabilities.

Measuring RF power
Measuring RF power has traditionally been notoriously difficult, except perhaps in
the singular case of continuous-wave (CW) sources that produce nice, well-behaved
sine waves. Even in that limited case, however, some measurement methods are distinctly better than others.
The peak voltage of a waveform is 100 V (i.e., peak-to-peak 200 V). Given that
the CW waveform is sinusoidal, we know that the root mean square (RMS) voltage is
0.707 V. The output power is related to the RMS voltage across the load by
(Vrms)2
P=
Zo

[27.11]

where:
P is the power, in watts
Vrms is the RMS potential, in volts
Zo is the load impedance, in ohms
If we assume a load impedance of 50 Ω, then we can state that the power in our
hypothetical illustration waveform is 100 W.

Chap27_Carr

4/10/01

4:03 PM

Page 530

530 Measurements and adjustment techniques
We can measure power on unmodulated sinusoidal waveforms by measuring either the RMS or peak values of either voltage or current, assuming that a constantvalue resistance load is present. But the problem becomes more complex on modulated signals. The various power readings on a Bird model 4311 peak power meter,
the peak (PEP) and average powers, vary markedly with modulation type.
One of the earliest forms of practical RF power measurement was the thermocouple RF ammeter (see Fig. 27-11). This instrument works by dissipating a small
amount of power in a small resistance inside the meter, and then measuring the heat
generated with a thermocouple. A dc current meter monitors the output of the thermocouple device, and indicates the level of current flowing in the heating element.
Because it works on the basis of the power dissipated heating a resistance, a thermocouple RF ammeter is inherently an RMS-reading device. Because of this feature it is very useful for making average power measurements. If we know the RMS
current and the resistive component of the load impedance, and if the reactive component is zero or very low, then we can determine RF power from the familiar expression:
P = I 2 × Ri

[27.12]

There is, however, a significant problem that keeps thermocouple RF ammeters
from being universally used in RF power measurement: those instruments are highly
frequency-dependent. Even at low frequencies, it is recommended that the meters
be mounted on insulating material with at least 3⁄8-in spacing between the meter and
its metal cabinet. Even with that precaution, however, there is a strong frequency
dependence that renders the meter less useful at higher frequencies. Some meters
are advertised to operate into the low-VHF region, but a note of caution is necessary.
That recommendation requires a copy of the calibrated frequency response curve
for that specific meter, so that a correction factor can be added (or subtracted) from

Input
terminals

Resistor
element

27-11 Circuit for thermocouple
RF ammeter.

Thermocouple

dc voltmeter

Chap27_Carr

4/10/01

4:03 PM

Page 531

Selecting and using RF wattmeters and antenna VSWR meters 531
the reading. At 10 MHz and higher, the readings of the thermocouple RF ammeter
must be taken with a certain amount of skepticism unless the original calibration
chart is available.
We can also measure RF power by measuring the voltage across the load resistance (see Fig. 27-12). In the circuit of Fig. 27-12, the RF voltage appearing across
the load is scaled downward to a level compatible with the voltmeter by the resistor
voltage divider (R2/R3). The output of this divider is rectified by CR1 and filtered to
dc by the action of capacitor C2.
The method of measuring the voltage in a simple diode voltmeter is valid only if
the RF signal is unmodulated and has a sinusoidal waveshape. While these criteria
are met in many transmitters, they are not universal. If the voltmeter circuit is peak
reading, as in Fig. 27-12, then the peak power is
Vo 2
P=
R1

[27.13]

The average power is then found by multiplying the peak power by 0.707. Some
meter circuits include voltage dividers that precede the meter and thereby convert
the reading to RMS, and thus convert the power to average power. Again, it must be
stressed that terms like RMS, average, and peak have meaning only when the input

R2
3300 

J1
RF
input

R1
50-
dummy
load

CR1
IN34
or
IN60
R3
1000 

C1
0.001 F

C2
0.001 F

27-12 RF voltmeter “wattmeter.”

M1
0 – 1 mA

Chap27_Carr

4/10/01

4:03 PM

Page 532

532 Measurements and adjustment techniques
RF signal is both unmodulated and sinusoidal. Otherwise, the readings are meaningless unless calibrated against some other source.
It is also possible to use various bridge methods for measurement of RF power.
Figure 27-13 shows a bridge set up to measure both forward and reverse power. This
circuit was once popular for VSWR meters. There are four elements in this quasiWheatstone bridge circuit: R1, R2 , R3, and the antenna impedance (connected to the
bridge at J2). If Rant is the antenna resistance, then we know that the bridge is in balance (i.e., the null condition) when the ratios R1/R2 and R3/Rant are equal. In an ideal
situation, resistor R3 will have a resistance equal to Rant , but that might overly limit
the usefulness of the bridge. In some cases, therefore, the bridge will use a compromise value such as 67 Ω for R3. Such a resistor will be usable on both 50- and 75-Ω
antenna systems with only small errors. Typically, these meters are designed to read
relative power level, rather than the actual power.
An advantage of this type of meter is that we can get an accurate measurement of
VSWR by proper calibration. With the switch in the forward position, and RF power
applied to J1 (XMTR), potentiometer R6 is adjusted to produce a full-scale deflection on
meter M1. When the switch is then set to the reverse position, the meter will read reverse power relative to the VSWR. An appropriate VSWR scale is provided.
R3
68 

J1
XMTR

J2

P2

D1
IN60
or
IN34

R1
47 k
C2
0.01 F

R4
47 k

R2
47 k
C1
0.01 F

R7
47 k

R5
1 k

FWD REV
S1
M1
0-100 A
R6
50 k
27-13 A bridge arrangement to measure both forward and reverse power.

RANT

Chap27_Carr

4/10/01

4:03 PM

Page 533

Selecting and using RF wattmeters and antenna VSWR meters 533
A significant problem with the bridge of Fig. 27-13 is that it cannot be left in the
circuit while transmitting because it dissipates a considerable amount of RF power
in the internal resistances. These meters, during the time when they were popular,
were provided with switches that bypassed the bridge when transmitting. The bridge
was only in the circuit when making a measurement.
An improved bridge circuit is the capacitor/resistor bridge in Fig. 27-14; this circuit is called the micromatch bridge. Immediately, we see that the micromatch is
improved over the conventional bridge because it uses only 1 Ω in series with the
line (Ri). This resistor dissipates considerably less power than the resistance used in
the previous example. Because of this low-value resistance, we can leave the micromatch in the line while transmitting. Recall that the ratios of the bridge arms must
be equal for the null condition to occur. In this case, the capacitive reactance ratio of
C1/C2 must match the resistance ratio R1/Rant. For a 50-Ω antenna, the ratio is 1⁄50, and
for 75-Ω antennas it is 1⁄75 (or, for the compromise situation, 1⁄68). The small-value
trimmer capacitor (C2) must be adjusted for a reactance ratio with C1 of 1⁄50, 1⁄75, or 1⁄68,
depending upon how the bridge is set up.
The sensitivity control can be used to calibrate the meter. In one version of
the micromatch, there are three power ranges (10, 100, and 1000 W). Each range
has its own sensitivity control, and these are switched in and out of the circuit
as needed.
The monomatch bridge circuit in Fig. 27-15 is the instrument of choice for HF
and low-VHF applications. In the monomatch design, the transmission line is segment

R1
1

J1
XMTR

J2
ant

C1
820 pF
S.M.

D1
IN60

C2
30 pF
RFC1
1 mH

RFC2
1 mH
R1
10 k
sensitivity

27-14 Micromatch wattmeter.

M1
0–500 A

Chap27_Carr

4/10/01

4:03 PM

Page 534

534 Measurements and adjustment techniques

CR2
IN60

R1
100 k

C2
0.01 F
R4
15 k

C
J1
XMTR

J2
ant

B
A
R2
100 

CR1
IN60
R3
15 k

C1
0.01 F

S1
FWD REV

R5
10 k

M1
0-500 A
C3
0.05 F

27-15 Monomatch wattmeter.

B, while RF sampling elements are formed by segments A and C. Although the original designs were based on a coaxial-cable sensor, later versions used either printed
circuit foil transmission line segments or parallel brass rods for A, B, and C.
The sensor unit is basically a directional coupler with a detector element for
both forward and reverse directions. For best accuracy, diodes CR1 and CR2 should
be matched, as should R1 and R2. The resistance of R1 and R2 should match the transmission line surge impedance, although in many instruments a 68-Ω compromise resistance is used.
The particular circuit shown in Fig. 27-15 uses a single dc meter movement to
monitor the output power. Many modern designs use two meters (one each for forward and reverse power).
One of the latest designs in VSWR meter sensors is the current transformer assembly shown in Fig. 27-16. In this instrument, a single-turn ferrite toroid transformer is used as the directional sensor. The transmission line passing through the
hole in the toroid “doughnut” forms the primary winding of a broadband RF transformer. The secondary, which consists of 10 to 40 turns of small enamel wire, is connected to a measurement bridge circuit (C1 + C2 + load) with a rectified dc output.
Figures 27-17 and 27-18 show instruments based on the current transformer
technique. Shown in Fig. 27-17 is the Heath model HM-102 high-frequency
VSWR/power meter. The sensor is a variant on the current transformer method. This

Chap27_Carr

4/10/01

4:03 PM

Page 535

Selecting and using RF wattmeters and antenna VSWR meters 535
T1
Conductor

J1
XMTR

C3
330 pF

L1
C5
0.001 F

D2
IN60

C2
10 pF

R2
68 k

C4
330 pF

D1
IN60

C1
10 pF

R1
68 k

J2
ant

1 mH

L2 1 mH
10 k
cal

S1
REV FWD

10 k
cal

C6
0.001 F

S2
VSWR PWR

C7
0.01 F

M1
0–100 A

27-16 Current transformer wattmeter.

27-17 Amateur radio RF wattmeter.

instrument measures both forward and reflected power, and it can be calibrated to
measure VSWR.
The Bird model 43 Thruline RF wattmeter shown in Fig. 27-18 has for years
been one of the industry standards in communications service work. Although it is
slightly more expensive than lesser instruments, it is also versatile, and it is accurate
and rugged. The Thruline meter can be inserted into the transmission line of an

Chap27_Carr

4/10/01

4:03 PM

Page 536

536 Measurements and adjustment techniques

27-18 Bird model 43 RF wattmeter.

antenna system with so little loss that it may be left permanently in the line during
normal operations. The Model 43 Thruline is popular with land mobile and marine
radio technicians.
The heart of the Thruline meter is the directional coupler transmission line assembly shown in Fig. 27-19A; it is connected in series with the antenna, or dummy
load, transmission line. The plug-in directional element can be rotated 180° to measure both forward and reverse power levels. A sampling loop and diode detector are
contained within each plug-in element. The main RF barrel is actually a special coaxial line segment with a 50-Ω characteristic impedance. The Thruline sensor works
due to the mutual inductance between the sample loop and center conductor of the
coaxial element. Figure 27-19B shows an equivalent circuit. The output voltage from
the sampler (e) is the sum of two voltages, er and em. Voltage er is created by the
voltage divider action of R and C on transmission line voltage E. If R is much less
then XC, then we may write the expression for er as
RE
er =  = RE( jω C)
XC

[27.14]

Voltage em, on the other hand, is due to mutual inductance, and is expressed by
em = I( j ω) ± M

[27.15]

We now have the expression for both factors that contribute to the total voltage
e. We know that:
e = e r + em

[27.16]

so, by substitution,
e = jωM

ZE  ± I
o

[27.17]

Chap27_Carr

4/10/01

4:03 PM

Page 537

Selecting and using RF wattmeters and antenna VSWR meters 537
ELEMENT CIRCUIT
Load
or
XMTR

XMTR
or
load

Meter

dc
connector

Directional
coupling
Crystal
diode
Element

Bypass
dc
contact

Meter
cable

27-19A Thruline sensor circuit.

em

27-19B Circuit of pick-up
element in a Model 43
wattmeter.

er

At any given point in a transmission line, E is the sum of the forward (Ef ) and reflected (Er ) voltages, and the line current is equal to
Ef Er
I =  –
Zo Zo

[27.18]

where Zo is the transmission line impedance.
We may specify e in the forms
j ω M(2Ef )
e = 
Zo

[27.19]

Chap27_Carr

4/10/01

4:03 PM

Page 538

538 Measurements and adjustment techniques
and
j ω M(2Er)
e = 
Zo

[27.20]

Relative, response dB

The output voltage e of the coupler, then, is proportional to the mutual inductance
and frequency (by virtue of jωM). But the manufacturer terminates R in a capacitive
reactance, so the frequency dependence is lessened (see Fig. 27-19C). Each element is
custom-calibrated, therefore, for a specific frequency and power range. Beyond the
specified range for any given element, however, performance is not guaranteed. There
are a large number of elements available that cover most commercial applications. The
Thruline meter is not a VSWR meter, but rather a power meter. VSWR can be determined from the formula, or by using the nomographs in Fig. 27-20. Some of the Thruline series intended for very high power (Fig. 27-19D) applications use an in-line coaxial
cable coupler (for broadcast-style hardline) and a remote indicator.

0
5
10

10C element: 10 W, 100-250 MHz

0
5
10

100C element: 100 W, 100-250 MHz

0
5
10

500C element: 500 W, 100-250 MHz
20

40

60 80 100

200

400 600 800 1000

Frequency in MHz
27-19C Power-frequency calibration.

27-19D High-power RF
wattmeters.

4:03 PM

Page 539

Selecting and using RF wattmeters and antenna VSWR meters 539
1.0
.9
.8
.7
.6
.5
.4
Reflected power (RF watts)

4/10/01

.3
.2
.1
.09
.08
.07
.06
.05
.04
.03
.02
.01
.05

1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 4.0 5.0 10 15 20 25 40 50

100 150 200 300 400 500

Forward power (RF watts)

A

Reflected power (RF watts)

Chap27_Carr

20
18
Reflected power
16 1
14
 Forward power
12 VSWR 
10
Reflected power
8 1
 Forward power
6
4

2.0
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
.8
.6
.4
.2
.05

1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 4.0 5.0

10 15 20 25 40 50

100 150 200 300 400 500

Reflected power (RF watts)

B
27-20 Forward versus reflected power graphs.

Chap27_Carr

4/10/01

4:03 PM

Page 540

540 Measurements and adjustment techniques

Dummy loads
A dummy load is a substitute antenna for making measurements and tests. In fact,
British radio engineers often refer to dummy loads as “artificial aerials.” There are
several uses for these devices. Radio operators should use dummy loads to tune up
on crowded channels and (only then) transfer to the live antenna.
The other use is in troubleshooting antenna systems. Suppose we have a system
in which the VSWR is high enough to affect the operation of the transmitter. You can
disconnect each successive element and connect the dummy load to its output. If
the VSWR goes down to the normal range, then the difficulty is downstream (i.e., toward the antenna). You will eventually find the bad element (which is usually the antenna itself).
Figure 27-21 shows the most elementary form of dummy load, which consists of
one or more resistors connected in parallel, series, or series-parallel so that the total
resistance is equal to the desired load impedance. The power dissipation is the sum
of the individual power dissipations. It is essential that noninductive resistors be
used for this application. For this reason, carbon-composition or metal-film resistors are used. For very low frequency work, it is permissible to use special counter
wound wire low-inductance resistors. These resistors, however, cannot be used over
a few hundred kilohertz.
Several commercial dummy loads are shown in Figs. 27-22 through 27-24. The
load in Fig. 27-22A is a 5-W model, and is typically used in Citizens Band servicing.
The resistor is mounted directly on a PL-259 coaxial connector. These loads typically
work to about 300 MHz, although many are not really useful over about 150 MHz. A
higher-power version of the same type is shown in Fig. 27-22B. This device works to
the low VHF region, and dissipates up to 50 W. I have used this dummy load for servicing high-VHF land mobile rigs, VHF-FM marine rigs, and low-VHF land mobile
rigs. Very high power loads are shown in Fig. 27-23. These devices are Bird Electronics “coaxial resistors,” and operate to power levels up to 10, 30, and 40 kW.
These high-power loads are cooled by flowing water through the body of the resistor
and then exhausting the heat in an air-cooled radiator.
Our final dummy load resistor is shown in Fig. 27-24. The actual resistor is
shown in Fig. 27-24A, and a schematic view is shown in Fig. 27-24B. The long, highpower noninductive resistor element is rated at 50 Ω, and can dissipate 1000 W for

PL-259
coax
connector

27-21 A very basic dummy load.

Chap27_Carr

4/10/01

4:04 PM

Page 541

Dummy loads 541

27-22A CB-style 5-W dummy load.

27-22B 15-W dummy load.

27-23 Termaline RF wattmeter.

27-24A Drake DL-1000 dummy load.

several minutes. If longer times, or higher powers, are anticipated, then forced air
cooling is applied by adding a blower to one end of the cage. The device is modified
by adding the BNC sampling jack. This jack is connected internally to either a twoturn loop, made of no.22 insulated hookup wire, or brass rods that are positioned
alongside the resistor element. It will therefore pick up a sample of the signal so that
it can be viewed on an oscilloscope, or used for other instrumentation purposes.

Chap27_Carr

4/10/01

4:04 PM

Page 542

542 Measurements and adjustment techniques
Shield

50- noninductive resistor
J1
SO-239
RF input

J2
BNC
sampling
100 
Brass tubing or
2–3 turn loop of
no. 22 wire
27-24B HF dummy load with pickup loop.

28

CHAPTER

General antenna
mechanical construction
techniques
ANTENNA INSTALLATION CHORES VARY IN COMPLEXITY FROM THE SIMPLE, WHICH A
teenager, with no assistance, can execute properly and safely, all the way up to largescale projects that are best left to professional antenna riggers. If your only antenna
installation chore is a dipole handing between the peak of your house roof and a
nearby tree, then little need be said besides “Be careful.”
The purpose of this chapter is to cover both wire and intermediate installation
jobs that can be done by amateurs if instructed properly. Keep in mind when planning an installation, however, that the information given herein is merely informal
guidance. Always have your plans reviewed by a professional mechanical or structural engineer licensed to practice in your state. In many locales, there are good insurance reasons for this step. Also, learn and abide by local mechanical, electrical,
and building codes. It is simply not worth the pain, and risk, to skirt around local
laws.

Antenna erection safety
Before dealing with the radio and performance issues, let’s deal first with a few antenna safety matters. You do not want to be hurt either during installation or during
the next wind storm. Two problems present themselves: reliable mechanical installation and electrical safety.
Radio antennas are inherently dangerous to erect if certain precautions are not
followed. It is not possible to foresee all the situations you might face in erecting an
antenna. I would like to give you all possible warnings, but this is not even possible.
You are on your own and must take responsibility for installing your own antenna. I
can, however, give you some general safety guidelines. Knowledge of what you face
and some hard-nosed, sound judgment, modulated by a little bit of common sense
are the best tools on any antenna job.
Copyright 2001 - the McGraw-Hill Companies

543

Chap28_Carr

4/13/01

11:20 AM

Page 544

544 General antenna mechanical construction techniques
One rule that is an absolute is that no antenna should ever be erected where the
antenna, the feedline, or any part thereof crosses over or under a power line or pole
transformer—ever! This is a “no kidder”—don’t do it. Every year we read sad news in
magazines or newspapers about a colleague being electrocuted while installing or
working on an antenna. In all these tragic cases, the antenna somehow came into contact with an ac power line. Keep in mind one dictum and make it an absolute:
There is never a time or situation when it is safe to let an antenna contact the electrical power lines!
This advice includes dipoles and other long wire antennas “thrown over” supposedly insulated lines, as well as antennas built from aluminum tubing. The excuse
that the power lines are insulated is hogwash. Old insulation crumbles on contact
with even a thin wire antenna. Don’t do it! The operant word is never!
Power lines look insulated, but there are often small breaks or weakened spots
(especially more than a couple days after installation) that can bring the antenna
into contact—lethal contact—with a “hot” power line. Every year or so we hear
about an SWL, scanner/monitor buff, or ham operator being killed by tossing an antenna wire over a power line. Avoid making yourself into a high-powered resistor—
it might blow your “life fuse.”
And the same rule applies to situations where the antenna can fall onto a power
line if it fails mechanically. You have to examine the situation to see if there is any
possible way for that antenna or its support structure to fall onto a power line if it
breaks in any way whatsoever. Figure 28-1 is a diagram of my lot in Virginia. A 23-ft
mast is erected at the back of the house, and its 23-ft “fall radius” is plotted. It should
not intersect either the power lines or the cable TV line, even when it fails and is
wind-whipped.
Note that the antenna could fall over the property line onto the next lot to the
rear. After consultation with the other landowner and the county mechanical inspector, it was determined that my rear fence is sufficient protection for the other
homeowner. Because it is technically on my land, the fence damage is my responsibility. However, should the other homeowner change his mind or a new homeowner
buys the place, then my antenna may have to be moved.
Another caution is that you must be physically fit to do the work. While the onthe-ground portion of the work is usually not too strenuous, any climbing at all, even
on ladders, can be taxing. Antenna materials are deceptively lightweight on the
ground, but when you get up on even a small ladder, they are remarkably difficult to
handle. Attempting to manhandle a 22-ft vertical once wiped my back out to the extent that I needed 800-mg of ibuprofen three times a day for about a week—and I
consider myself lucky that the pain hit me after I had dismounted the ladder. Besides, if you could see me, you would wonder why a man my size was on any ladder
in the first place!
Before using a ladder, learn how to use a ladder. A lot of homeowners, whether
putting up antennas or painting the upstairs windows, fall off ladders that were being
used incorrectly. There is a right way and a wrong way to use each of the different
types of ladder; learn to use them correctly.
If the wind blows even a few kilometers per hour, the danger is magnified considerably. I recall a friend, who is a large, strong “bear of a man,” attempting to install

Chap28_Carr

4/13/01

11:20 AM

Page 545

Antenna erection safety 545

28-1 Antenna installation on suburban lot.

a 26-element television “all channel” rotatable antenna on the roof of his two-story
beach house. He wanted to be able to pick up Richmond, VA; Norfolk, VA; Washington, DC; and Baltimore, MD, on television, plus scanner bands, from his beach house
on the Chesapeake Bay. The antenna was handled easily with one hand on the
ground and with no wind blowing. But up on the roof, it was a different story! “Big
Al” was on the peak of the roof when an off-shore gust of wind came up suddenly and
caught the antenna. It acted like a hang glider and pulled Al off the roof, plunging
him down two stories to the patio below. He fractured his pelvis and busted a leg.
Two months of orthopedic casts and a year of physical therapy followed—not to
mention lost wages. Expensive TV antenna, I reckon. Be careful!
One good rule is to always work under the “buddy system.” Ask as many friends
as are needed to do the job safely, and always have at least one assistant, even when
you think you can do it alone.
Always use quality materials and good work practices. Antennas, being potentially dangerous, always should have the best of both materials and workmanship in
order to keep quality high. It is not just the electrical or radio reception workings
that are important but also the ability to stay up in the air and be safe.
When planning an antenna job, keep in mind that pedestrian traffic in your yard
possibly could affect the antenna system. Wires are difficult to see, and if an antenna

Chap28_Carr

4/13/01

11:20 AM

Page 546

546 General antenna mechanical construction techniques
wire is low enough to intersect someone’s body, then it is possible to cause very serious injuries to passersby. In the United States, even when the person is a trespasser
(or even a burglar!), the courts may hold a homeowner liable for injuries caused by
an inappropriately designed and installed antenna. Take care for safety not only of
yourself but also of others.
Consider a typical scenario involving a four- or five-band trap vertical antenna
(Fig. 28-2). It will be 18 to 26 ft tall, judging from the advertisements in magazines,
and will be mounted on a roof or mast 12 to 30 ft off the ground. Consider the case
of a 25-ft-tall trap vertical installed atop a 15-ft-high telescoping TV antenna mast.
The total height above ground will be the sum of the two heights: 15 ft 25 ft  40
ft. The tip of the vertical is 40-ft above ground level. You must select a location at
which a 40-ft aluminum pole can fit—and fall. This requirement limits the selection
of locations for the antenna. If this is done, then a wind storm cannot result in a
shorted or downed power line if the antenna falls over.
When installing a vertical antenna, especially one that is not ground-mounted,
make sure that you have help. It takes at least two people to safely install a standard
HF vertical antenna, and more may be needed for especially large models. If you are
alone, then go find some friends to lend an arm or two. Wrenched backs, smashed
antennas, crunched house parts, and other calamities simply do not happen as often
on a well-organized work party that has sufficient hands to do the job safely.
The second issue pertaining to installing antennas is old-fashioned mechanical
integrity. Two problems are often seen. First, you must comply with local building

Antenna
(18 to 26 ft.)

Roo

f

28-2 Mast-mounted vertical antenna.
TV-type
mast
(12 to 30 ft.)

24" Ground pin

Chap28_Carr

4/13/01

11:20 AM

Page 547

Antenna erection safety 547
codes, regulations, and inspections. The local government has a reasonable interest
and absolute right to impose reasonable engineering standards on the electrical and
mechanical installation of radio antennas. The second issue is that it is in your own
best interest to make the installation as good as possible. Consider the local regulations as the minimum acceptable standard, not the maximum.
Both these mechanical integrity issues become extremely important if a problem develops. For example, suppose that a wind or snow storm wrecks the antenna,
plus part of your house. Your insurance company may not pay off if your local government requires an inspection and you failed to get one. Make sure that the mechanical and/or electrical inspector (as required by the law) leaves a certificate or
receipt proving that the final inspection was done. It could come in handy when disputing the insurance company over damage.
A quality installation starts with the selection of good hardware for the installation. Any radio-TV parts distributor who sells TV antenna hardware will have what
you need in most cases. I used Radio Shack standoff brackets, ground pin, and a 19ft telescoping mast in one installation. Wherever you buy, select the best-quality,
strongest materials that you can find. Opt for steel masts and brackets over aluminum, no matter what the salesperson behind the counter tells you. Keep in mind
that although salespeople can be knowledgeable and even helpful, you, not they, are
responsible for the integrity of the installation.
Local government One necessary reminder is that your local government
might have some interesting ideas—legal requirements, actually—concerning
your antenna installation. The electrical, mechanical, and zoning codes must be
observed. There is a great deal of similarity between local codes because most of
them are adaptations (even adoptions) from certain national standards. But there
are enough differences that one needs to consult local authorities. Indeed, you
may need a license or building permit to install an antenna in the first place.
One problem that SWLs and scanner/monitor buffs face in the United States is
that their antennas are not protected by the Federal Communications Commission,
as are ham antennas. Local governments have limited rights to regulate ham antennas—only “reasonable” mechanical and electrical standards can be imposed. It may
be illegal for you to install any type of antenna.
Save all paperwork regarding your building permit, including the inspection certificates, decals, letters or papers, and the original drawings (with the local building
inspector’s stamps). If a casualty occurs, then your insurance company may elect not
to pay off if you have violated an electrical, mechanical, building, or zoning code.
This advice may be overlooked by an enthusiastic antenna builder, but it could prove
to be a costly oversight if something bad happens.
In some jurisdictions, there might be another limitation on antenna location.
Some local governments have a requirement that the antenna be able to fall over and
land entirely on your own property. About 30 years ago, a Maryland county required
that antennas be installed double their own length plus 50 ft from the nearest property line—until a local ham radio club sued on grounds that about 99.99 percent of
the rooftop TV antennas in the county were noncompliant. In one humorous scene,
a group of amateur radio operators went down to the county offices and asked for
about 50,000 complaint forms. They filled out several thousand against homeowners

Chap28_Carr

4/13/01

11:20 AM

Page 548

548 General antenna mechanical construction techniques
with TV antennas before they were stopped by the county officer. Before installing
any antenna, check with the local building codes!

Wire antenna construction
Volumes have been written on wire antennas. Indeed, many of my antenna books
spend a lot of space on the topic. What seems to be missing in many books is details
on the mechanical aspects of wire antenna construction and installation. Although
some books cover the mechanical details, much is often missing. Let’s take a look at
some of the basics.

The basic wire antenna
Wire antennas come in a bewildering variety of forms, but for our purposes, the
“standard model” is our old friend the half-wavelength horizontal dipole (Fig. 28-3).
The overall length (A) in meters is found from 144/FMHz. Each element (B) is onehalf the overall length, or 72/FMHz. The antenna’s nominal feedpoint impedance at
resonance is 73 , so it is a good match to standard 75- coaxial cable. It is common
practice to use a 1:1 balun transformer at the feedpoint in order to balance currents
and keep the pattern according to textbook predictions.

Center insulators
It was once common (but poor) practice to strip a few centimeters of coaxial cable,
part the braid and center conductor, and connect them to each side of the dipole. We
could then wonder why the darn thing fell down in the next wind storm. Even if you
elect to not use the balun transformer, a ready-made center insulator is a must. Figure 28-4A shows a common form of center insulator for use with dipoles and other
wire antennas. There is an SO-239 UHF coaxial connector on the bottom to accept
the feedline and two eyebolts mounted with solder connectors for the antenna elements on the sidewalls. At the top is a small eyebolt that is used to strain-relieve the
system, or to hang it from a center support (as when inverted-V dipoles are built).
A larger form of center insulator is shown in Fig. 28-4B. The enlarged down section indicates that this device contains either a 4:1 or 1:1 impedance ratio balun

28-3 Dipole antenna.

Chap28_Carr

4/13/01

11:20 AM

Page 549

Wire antenna construction 549

28-4A Center insulator.

transformer. The 1:1 size is recommended for ordinary dipoles, whereas a 4:1 unit is
used for folded dipoles and certain other wire antennas.
Connections to the device, whether straight center insulator or balun form, are
shown in Fig. 28-5. For simplicity, only one side is shown (the other side is identical).
The elements (B in Fig. 28-3) typically are made of no. 12 or no. 14 antenna wire.
The best wire is stranded and is copper-clad steel core wire (Copperweld).
The end of the antenna wire is passed through the eyebolt and then doubled back
and twisted onto itself 7 to 10 times. The remainder of the wire is then soldered to the
terminal. Some people prefer to use a separate “pigtail” wire to connect the antenna
element to the solder terminal. It is fastened to the antenna element wire between the
7- to 10-turn twist and the eyebolt.
When preparing the center connector/balun, it is good practice to use steel wool
or sandpaper on the solder lug to remove oxidation. Oxidation makes it hard to solder and forces you to use too much heat to make a good connection. Also, be sure to
have a large pair of pliers to crimp the wings of the solder lugs onto the wire.
Solder assists in making a good connection at the solder lugs, but the crimp
should be good enough to do the job. The solder then provides corrosion protection.
Also, tin the 7- to 10-turn twist section with solder. This does not increase the
strength or provide better electrical connection—it is protection against the corrosion that will occur with copper wires.
Note Use only resin-core solder for antennas! Typical solder is 50/50 or 60/40
lead/tin ratio and may be labeled “radio-TV” or “electronic” or something similar.
Plumber’s solder is acid core and will destroy your antenna within a short time after
it is erected.

Chap28_Carr

4/13/01

11:20 AM

Page 550

550 General antenna mechanical construction techniques

28-4B Balun/center insulator.

Figure 28-6 shows the dipole installed. The ends of the two wire elements are
connected to end insulators, which are in turn supported by rope to a vertical support (e.g., mast, tree, roof line of the house, etc.). Although shown nice and straight
here, the actual installation will droop a bit in the center due to the weights of the
center insulator or balun, the coaxial cable, and the wire itself. Gravity!
Note that the coaxial cable is formed into a 15- to 25-cm loop just below the coaxial connector to the center insulator or balun. This forms a species of RF choke to keep
currents from flowing in the outer shield and improves the pattern. The coaxial cable
loop is bound together with black electrician’s tape or some similar adhesive medium
and then fastened to the top eyelet with stout string or fishing line for strain relief.

Chap28_Carr

4/13/01

11:20 AM

Page 551

Wire antenna construction 551

28-5 Center insulator/balun connections.

Support rope
The support rope selected should be large enough to provide support but small
enough to fit through the holes of the end insulators. Cotton rope is singularly unsuited to this task because it weathers poorly and will rot through in short order. Nylon rope, sail rope, and parachute rope are perhaps the best types, especially if a
particular lot has been tested for high tensile strength. Remember, the wind loading
of your antenna, even a short dipole, can be tremendous!

End insulators
End insulators come in a large variety of shapes and sizes (I have even seen one chap
use old toothbrushes, suitably drilled, of course). The main categories, however, are
represented in Fig. 28-7. The version in Fig. 28-7A is the standard form, whereas
that in Fig. 28-7B is an “egg” insulator. The egg insulator has two sets of wire grooves
and through-holes that are orthogonal to each other (only one set is shown). Wire
passes through one hold and set of grooves, and the supporting rope passes through
the other hole/groove set.
The standard form shown in Fig. 28-7A has a number of grooves or ridges cut
along the body. These grooves are intended to lengthen the electrical path between

Chap28_Carr

4/13/01

11:20 AM

Page 552

28-6 Dipole and wire antenna installation.

552 General antenna mechanical construction techniques

Chap28_Carr

4/13/01

11:20 AM

Page 553

Wire antenna construction 553
ends of the insulator and therefore serve to reduce losses in the insulator. Typical
materials used to construct insulators include ceramic, glass, nylon, and plastics.
Figure 28-8 shows the connections to the end insulator. The electrical connections to the antenna wire are the same as for the center insulator. The only proviso
here is that for transmitting antennas, it is wise not to leave any sharp points sticking up. The end of the dipole is at high RF voltages, so sharp points tend to cause
corona sparking. Cut off any extraneous leads that form sharp points, and then
smooth the whole affair down with tinning (i.e., solder).
The rope is treated in a similar manner as the wire, but it must be knotted in
some manner that tends to pull together as the rope is pulled into tension. Some
people use the “hangman’s knot,” but this seems a bit excessive.

Strain relief of the antenna
Figure 28-9 shows a method of strain relief for the center insulator or balun. This
point is at the highest tension and probably is the weakest because of the number of

A

B
28-7 End insulators.

28-8 Connections to end insulators.

Chap28_Carr

4/13/01

11:20 AM

Page 554

554 General antenna mechanical construction techniques

28-9 Strain relieving the center insulator or balun.

connections and things that can break. A suspension rope is run between the antenna’s vertical supports, parallel to the antenna wire. It is tied to the top eyelet on
the center insulator or balun by a short bit of rope about 15 to 20 cm long.

Special case of the folded dipole
The folded dipole (Fig. 28-10) is a special case of the half-wavelength horizontal dipole. It consists of two close-spaced conductors shorted together on the extreme
ends. One of the conductors is split in the center and used as the feedpoint. The
feedpoint impedance at resonance is around 280 , so it makes a good match to 300 television antenna twin lead. The usual practice is to build the entire antenna and
feedline out of twin lead. An alternative (as shown in Fig. 28-10) is to provide a 4:1
balun transformer at the feedpoint to match 75- coaxial cable. Despite the fact that
300- TV twin lead is disappearing from the market, the folded dipole maintains a
certain following among SWLs and hams.
The problem is how to install the antenna such that the terribly weak 300- twin
lead wires do not break at the slightest provocation. Figure 28-11 shows a solution
used by one fellow (admittedly a fine worker in plastics and other materials). He
fashioned a center insulator and the end insulators from a piece of strong Lucite
material.
The 300- TV twin lead is prepared as shown in Fig. 28-11A. The antenna element is notched in the center (break along the bottom) for about 1 to 1.5 cm. A hand
punch is used to place two or three holes in the center insulation on either side of
the break. Either a large-size leather punch or a paper punch can be used to make

Chap28_Carr

4/13/01

11:20 AM

Page 555

Special case of the folded dipole 555

28-10 Folded dipole.

B

C
A
28-11 Center insulator for ribbon cable folded dipole: (A) cable preparation, (B) front/back
view, (C) edge view.

Chap28_Carr

4/13/01

11:20 AM

Page 556

556 General antenna mechanical construction techniques
the holes. In a test, I was able to make the required holes using a hand-operated paper punch, but it required a large force (and turned my hand temporarily purple!).
The center insulator is shown in Fig. 28-11B. It is made from a piece of strong
plastic, Lucite, or other insulating material. Two identical sections, front and back,
are needed. A number of 5-mm holes are drilled into both pieces at the points shown
to clamp the twin lead. A pair of solder lugs is provided to make connections between the antenna element and the transmission line (either twin lead or leads from
a balun). The screws and nuts used to fasten the two halves of the insulator are made
of nylon to prevent interaction with the antenna.
A side view is shown in Fig. 28-11C. Note that the twin lead causes a gap that can
catch water. It also makes it possible to break one or both insulators by overtightening the nuts. In order to prevent this, a gasket of similar material is glued into the
space as filler. The gasket material should be about as thick as the twin lead.
If you opt for a balun transformer, then it can be wired to the downleg of the tee
insulator using the holes that normally would clamp the twin-lead transmission line.
An end insulator for twin-lead antennas is shown in Fig. 28-12. It is constructed
in a similar manner to the center insulator. Two scenarios are possible. The first, and
that used in a test antenna, is to make the clamping fixture from metal such as 3- to
6-mm brass or copper stock. The ends of the antenna wires are shorted, so this is not
a great problem.
An end insulator is then used with a rope in the normal manner. A chain-link section is used to fasten the clamping fixture and the end insulator. I attempted this
with a nylon chain link, about 1.5  2.5 in, from a do-it-yourself hardware store. It
was only with a bit of difficulty that the ends were pulled apart, slipped into both the
end insulator and the clamping fixture, and then reclosed.
The second approach is to make the clamping fixture out of the same material as
the center insulator. It then becomes the end insulator, so the other end insulator and
that cursed chain link can be ignored. If you opt for this approach, it is a good idea to
smooth and polish the rope hole on the clamping fixture to prevent chaffing of the rope.

Masts and other supports for wire antennas
The end supports of the antenna can be anything that provides height: a mast, a tree,
or the roof line of a building. Figure 28-13 shows the use of a mast, but either of the
other forms of support could be used as well. The support rope is not tied off at the

28-12 Folded dipole end insulator.

Chap28_Carr

4/13/01

11:20 AM

Page 557

Masts and other supports for wire antennas 557

28-13 Mounting mast schemes.

top, as is true in all too many installations, but rather is brought down to ground level.
This approach facilitates raising and lowering the antenna for maintenance and tuning.
Be sure to provide enough “dead slack” to make lowering the antenna feasible.
The antenna support rope is connected to a spring on one end and a counterweight on the other end. The spring should be stout enough so that it is only slightly
extended when the full weight of the antenna places it in tension. I have used doorsprings for this task, but only the stoutest varieties.
The counterweight should be just enough to balance the weight of the antenna
and keep it not quite taut. As wind moves the antenna up and down, the counterweight raises and lowers, thereby reducing the chances of straining the antenna
wires to their limit. Any number of counterweights can be used. I have seen a number of types: drapery cord weights, a small bucket of rocks, a gaggle of fishing
weights, and (in one case) a burned-out automobile starter motor (the mounting
hole on the front boss of the motor was ideal for accepting the rope).
Figures 28-14A and 28-14B show two methods for making the connections at the
top of the mast. Although egg insulators are shown here for the sake of fairness (the
alternate form was shown earlier), either form can be used. A pulley is mounted on
the top of the mast with a link section and a stout eyebolt that passes through the
mount. In the case of a tree, I have used a steel band of the type used to mount TV
antennas to house chimneys. By making the down rope a closed loop, you gain the

Chap28_Carr

4/13/01

11:20 AM

Page 558

558 General antenna mechanical construction techniques

A

B
28-14 Two alternate pulley systems for wire antenna mounting.

ability to raise and lower the antenna. But do not let a loose end slip, or you will be
chasing the rope up the mast as it slips through the pulley.
Pulleys work nicely, but they are mechanical contraptions that tend to fail occasionally. When they fail, the rope gets stuck. Pulleys also can corrode rather badly,
with the same end result. All in all, a pulley is not the best solution for most people.
Figure 28-15 shows a better way. In this approach, a U-bolt is fastened to the top
of the support mast. If the U-bolt is made of brass, then all the better, for it will not
corrode. The rope can be passed through the U-bolt as in the pulley system but without the mechanical failure problem. Be sure to install the U-bolt all the way up to the
threads so that the rope will not chafe against them.
The method shown in Fig. 28-16 can only be used by a horse lover! This method
uses a brass stirrup in place of the U-bolt. If you have switched to cars or trucks and
no longer need your horse stirrups, then perhaps this is a viable means of attaching
the support rope to the top of the mast.

Chap28_Carr

4/13/01

11:20 AM

Page 559

Masts and other supports for wire antennas 559

28-15 U-bolt end mounting.

28-16 Stirrup end mounting.

Chap28_Carr

4/13/01

11:20 AM

Page 560

560 General antenna mechanical construction techniques

Installing vertical antennas
Despite continuous (and mostly untrue) stories of very poor performance, the fouror five-band commercially manufactured trap vertical antenna remains one of the
most popular amateur radio “antlers” in the HF bands. They are economical compared with directional rotating beam antennas, easy to erect, and do not have to occupy a lot of real estate (the “footprint” of the vertical can be very small, especially
if you bury the radials). Unfortunately, a misinstalled vertical is both dangerous and
a very poor performer. This section covers both problems in order to give you a good
chance of success.

Electrical installation
Figure 28-17 shows the usual form of multiband trap vertical antenna. Each trap
(TR1–TR3) is a parallel resonant LC tank circuit that blocks a certain frequency but
passes all others. In Fig. 28-17, TR1 is the 10-m trap, TR2 is the 15-m trap, and TR3
is the 20-m trap. No 40-m trap is needed because the antenna resonates the entire
length of the tubing on 40 m. Each section (except perhaps the 10-m section) is actually a little shorter than might be expected from the standard quarter-wavelength
formulas. This is because the traps tend to act inductively and so lessen the length
required to resonate on any given band.
The vertical antenna manufacturer might give suggested lengths for the various
segments between traps. Do not make the mistake of assuming that these are absolute numbers. They are only recommended starting points, even though the literature packed with the antenna may suggest otherwise. Loosely (meaning do not
tighten the clamps too much) but safely install the antenna, and then adjust each
segment for resonance. Start with the 10-m band, and then work each lower-frequency band in succession: 10-15-20-40, etc. After each lower band is adjusted,
recheck the higher bands to make sure that nothing has shifted, because there might
be a little interaction between bands. Once the antenna is properly resonant, tighten
the clamps, and make the final installation. I know this is a pain in the neck, and
means putting the antenna up and taking it down a couple of times, but it pays dividends in the end. I failed to do this once and found that the 15-m band was useless;
it resonated at 19.2 MHz.
Radials make or break a vertical antenna; they form the ground plane for the antenna. AM broadcast stations typically use vertical antennas and must have 120 radials for the ground plane. Antenna reference books usually contain a graph plotted
to show the effectiveness of radials and demonstrate a decreasing return on investment after about 32 radials. For amateur work, I recommend not less than 2 radials
per band, and preferably 4, arranged so that they are equally spaced around the antenna. If you cannot space them correctly, never fear; they will work anyway. On a
four-band antenna, this means 16 radials, which really is not a lot. Of course, the general rule is that the more radials, the better is the antenna, at least up to the point
where diminishing returns are realized.
The radials are made of no. 14 wire and must be a quarter wavelength
(246/FMHz). Figure 28-18 shows how to mount the radials on a mast-mounted (or
roof-mounted) installation, and Fig. 28-19 shows radials in a ground-mounted situa-

Chap28_Carr

4/13/01

11:20 AM

Page 561

Installing vertical antennas 561

Capacity
"hat"

TR3

TR2

TR1

Base
insulator

28-17 Mounting commercial trap vertical.

Mounting
pipe

tion. I do not recommend radials on the surface for ground-mounted antennas. It is
too easy for a guest or even a trespasser to trip over the radials, and this could land
you in court. Wire radials can be buried using a spade tip to cut a 3- to 4-in slit, and
they even make for a better ground.

Ground mounting verticals and masts
In the preceding section, the essential assumption was that the antenna is mounted
above ground, on a mast or other support. In this section you will take a look at the
methods of ground mounting the antenna or its mast. The same mast ideas are also
useful for erecting supports for dipoles and other wire antennas.
Figure 28-20 shows a standard chain-link fence post used as a support for either
a vertical antenna or a mast (which could be metal, PVC, or wood). The typical fence
post is 1.25 to 2.00 in outside diameter and made of thick-wall galvanized steel. Thus
such a pipe makes a tough installation. Some authorities believe that the pipe will
last longer if painted its entire length (especially the underground portion) with a
rust-inhibiting paint such as Rustoleum.

Chap28_Carr

4/13/01

11:20 AM

Page 562

562 General antenna mechanical construction techniques

Coax to
transmitter

Radials

Insulator
Insulator

Rope

Insulator

Insulator

Rope
Rope

Rope

28-18 Feeding the mast-mounted vertical antenna.

3 to 4 in. or more

Coax
to XMTR

Ground level

Buried radials
28-19 Feeding the ground-mounted vertical antenna.

The beauty of the fence post as an antenna support is that it is relatively easy to
install, and supplies are obtained easily from hardware stores. The post is mounted
in a concrete plug set at depth D in the ground (see again Fig. 28-20). The depth D
is a function of local climate and local building codes. In the absence of local regulations to the contrary, make the hole at least 24 in deep (or more). The depth is determined by the 100-year depth of the frost line in your area, a figure well familiar to
local building experts. Keep in mind, however, that shallower depths may be legal for

Chap28_Carr

4/13/01

11:20 AM

Page 563

Installing vertical antennas 563

H
28-20 Fence post mounting.

Ground level
Backfill
Concrete
plug

D

Gravel

fence posts, but installation of a vertical antenna (or mast) on top of the fence post
changes the mechanical situation considerably.
The hole can be dug with a post-hole digger tool or an earth-auger-bit tool. The
latter often can be rented in either gasoline engine, electrical motor, or manual versions from tool rental stores.
Once the hole is dug, place about 4 in (or local requirement) of gravel at the bottom of the hole. This gravel can be bought in bags from hardware stores for small
jobs. The post is installed at this point and made plumb (i.e., it is made to sit vertical
in the hole). Gravel can be used to force the post to remain upright as the job is finished. On top of the gravel is a concrete plug that fills the hole to at least 4 in below
the surface. The rest of the hole is backfilled with dirt, unless you want the plug to
extend all the way to the surface. Do not put anything on top of the post for at least
4 days or whatever period of time the concrete manufacturer recommends. Concrete
needs time to cure, and 4 to 7 days seems to be the recommended period of time. It
is probably a good idea to install the post one weekend and then complete the antenna installation the following weekend.

Chap28_Carr

4/13/01

11:20 AM

Page 564

564 General antenna mechanical construction techniques
Chain-link fence posts tend to be about 4 ft high, and this is sufficient for installation of masts for inverted-V and dipole support. However, for vertical installation,
make the height H of the post about 18 in (otherwise, the antenna tries to act differently from the instructions).
If the antenna is a standard vertical with the usual form of offset base (as shown
in Fig. 28-20), then use either the mounting brackets that come with the antenna or
U-bolts fastened around the fence post. Never use a single mounting point; always
use at least two-point mounting to prevent the antenna from pivoting and shearing
off the mounting hardware.
Figure 28-21 shows how to mount a 2  4 mast to a fence post. Good-quality 2
 4 lumber can be purchased in lengths up to 20 ft, although, 8-, 10-, 12-, and 16-ft
lengths are the most commonly available (in my area, 16- and 20-ft lengths have to
be bought at professional “contractor” lumberyards rather than those which serve
homeowners). The 2  4 selected should be kiln-dried and pressure-treated. It also
should be painted in order to minimize the effects of weathering on the mechanical
integrity of the installation. Good-quality 2  4 lumber is relatively inexpensive, but

2"4"16'

2--4
Wedge
Wedge
U-bolt
U-bolt
and nut

Brick

28-21 Making a mast mounted to
a fence post.

Chap28_Carr

4/13/01

11:20 AM

Page 565

Installing vertical antennas 565
the less costly material (which is only marginally less costly than the best) will warp
and ruin the installation within 1 year.
The 2  4 is attached to the fence post using U-bolts. A 2  4 scrap is used as a
wedge to take up the difference between the post and the mast. In some installations
the U-bolt will go around the perimeter of the 2  4, whereas in others a pair of holes
will be drilled in the 2  4 to admit the U-bolt arms. The U-bolt must be at least 14in no. 20 thread, and either a 516-in bolt or a 38-in bolt is highly recommend if the
mast supports any significant weight. Some installers like to place a brick at the base
of the 2  4. This support bears the static and dynamic loads (i.e., gravity and wind)
that eventually would cause the mast to list because of the eccentric loading on the
footer. The auxiliary purpose is to keep the butt end of the 2  4 off the ground and
thereby prevent rot. Some additional mechanical stability might be afforded by replacing the brick with a cinder block that is filled with concrete. Another approach is
to install a pressure-treated 4  4 of the sort used to support decks (Fig. 28-22).
Hardware stores and lumber yards sell the specially treated 4  4 posts and the concrete for the footers. These footers are dropped onto a gravel bed at the bottom of a
hole (see the preceding section for a discussion of how deep the hole must be). A
typical deck footer has a plastic or heavy-duty metal mount to support the 4  4. After the footer and mount are installed, the hole is backfilled with soil. Some people
prefer to backfill, at least to a point above the mount, with builder’s gravel (of the
same sort as used beneath the concrete footer), or concrete can be used for maximum stability.

Installing towers
Antenna towers are used extensively in amateur and commercial radio communications systems for a very obvious reason: Antennas tend to work better “at altitude”
than on the ground. Amateur operators tend to install 30- to 100-ft towers, although
the 40- and 50-ft models probably predominate for practical (and in some areas

Treated
44

28-22 A 4  4 antenna support.
Backfill
Mount

Gravel

Concrete
foot

Chap28_Carr

4/13/01

11:20 AM

Page 566

566 General antenna mechanical construction techniques
legal) reasons. Local laws vary considerably, from one area to another. Be sure to
consult the bureaucracy before erecting a tower.
In my own area, a 30-ft tower that is physically attached to a two-story house
does not need a permit or inspection (but must be constructed according to certain
regulations), although anything mounted away from the house (or at a height
greater than 30 ft, if attached to the house) requires a permit and the usual mechanical inspection. The law requires that an inspection be performed when the hole
for the footing is completed and 4 in of gravel is on the bottom. The inspector will
take a yardstick and measure both the depth of the hole and the depth of the gravel.
A final inspection is performed when the antenna is installed. Prior to all this mess,
a permit must be obtained (which means drawings submitted).
Several different types of towers are used by amateurs. Some are square-base designs, and others are triangular-base designs. At least one commercial model is a
round pipe that has a rotator at the base. In this model, the entire tower turns when
the antenna is rotated. Several tower configurations are seen commonly. Figure 28-23
shows the fixed form of tower. This type of tower costs the least, and a case can be

Mast
Beam
antenna

Rotator

28-23 Antenna tower on hinged
baseplate.

Concrete
pedestal

Hinged
baseplate

Chap28_Carr

4/13/01

11:20 AM

Page 567

Installing vertical antennas 567
made for it also being the most stable. It is made of 10-ft sections and an 8- to 12-ft
top section that contains the thrust bearing for the antenna mast and rotator mounting platform. Some fixed towers are self-supporting up to a point, but the use of guy
wires is always recommended unless a firm mounting point (against the side of a
building, for example) is provided about 18 ft above the surface. The fixed tower can
be made to tilt over at the base by using a hinged baseplate on the mounting pedestal.
The tilt-over tower is shown in Fig. 28-24. This type of tower uses the same sort
of construction as the fixed model but is hinged at a point between one-third and
one-half the total height. A winch at the base drives a steel wire that is used to raise
or lower the tower between fully extended and fold-over positions.
Still another configuration is shown in Fig. 28-25. This type of tower is the slipup variety. A wide base section supports a smaller movable upper section. A winch is
used to lift the upper section into its fully extended position. Typical examples will
raise from a low position of 20 ft, to a height of 40 ft or so when fully extended (or
20/50 ft). When the tower is fully extended, it is locked into place at the bottom of
the upper section with steel bolts. A lot of shear force is applied to these bolts, so it
is wise to use several very hard stainless steel bolts for the lockdown.
There is a serious danger inherent in the design of the slip-up tower: the guillotine effect. If the upper section comes loose while you are working on it, it will come
plummeting down the shaft formed by the lower section and shear off any arms, legs,
or other body parts that get in the way. Whenever you work on this form of tower,
use steel fence posts (or similar pieces of metal) as a safety measure (Fig. 28-26); at
least two should be used, and both should be attached securely at both ends with

Wire
rope

Winch

28-24 Fold-over tower.

Chap28_Carr

4/13/01

11:20 AM

Page 568

568 General antenna mechanical construction techniques

28-25 Slip-up tower.
Shown
cut-away

Winch

rope. The purpose of the rope is to prevent the safety pipes from working loose and
falling out. These pipes are used in addition to, not instead of, the normal bolt fasteners that keep the antenna tower erect.
The antenna tower, regardless of its configuration, is typically installed on a
buried pedestal made of concrete (Fig. 28-27). The construction must follow local
laws, but there are some general considerations to keep in mind. The surface area of
the pedestal is 242 to 362 in. The top surface is fitted with either a fixed or hinged
baseplate (which must be installed before the concrete sets). The depth of the

Chap28_Carr

4/13/01

11:20 AM

Page 569

Installing vertical antennas 569

Steel safety pipes
IN ADDITION TO
normal fasteners

28-26 Safety precaution.

Hinged or
fixed
baseplate

6 Inches

Concrete
pedestal
D

Gravel
4 Inches
28-27 Ground pedestal.

Chap28_Carr

4/13/01

11:20 AM

Page 570

570 General antenna mechanical construction techniques
pedestal and the depth of the gravel base tend to reflect the local frost line. Regardless
of how general local law is, good advice is to make the pedestal at least 28 in deep—
even if local law permits less.
Raising the tower can be accomplished by either of two methods, although, in
my opinion, only one of them is safe. Figure 28-28 shows a method by which the
tower is laid out on the ground and then raised with a heavy rope over a high support
(such as the peak of the house roof). This method is dangerous unless certain precautions are taken. For example, a support must be placed beneath the antenna as
it is raised. This requirement means that a constantly increasing height of the tower
demands a constantly increasing lower support.
The end-over-end method of raising a tower is shown in Fig. 28-29. A “gin pole”
is required for this job. The gin pole is a length of pipe fitted with a pulley at the top
and a pair of clamps at the bottom. The gin pole is clamped onto the top end of the
highest section so that it can be used to raise the next 10-ft section into place, where
it can be bolted down. The gin pole is then raised to the top of the newly installed
section, where the operation is repeated again. The end-over-end method is preferred by tower manufacturers and is the method recommended by most of them.
The antenna tower will be most stable if guy wires are installed at appropriate
places determined by the tower manufacturer. Although many people are inclined to
install towers “free standing” and some towers are advertised as such, it is always
good practice to use guy wires attached to at least one point (or more, for tall towers). Use at least four guy wires on a square tower or three on a triangle tower (one
in each direction). Figure 28-30 shows two methods for securing the guy wires to the
ground. One approach is to bury a heavy concrete or metal “deadman” weight underground. Alternatively, use at least one 4- to 6-ft pipe (1 to 1.5-in in diameter)
buried up to a length of 12 to 24 in (18 in is shown in Fig. 28-30).
Note It is absolutely essential to use safety belts when climbing a tower. Use
two belts that are completely independent of each other so that no “single-point failure” can eliminate the belt’s function. Always keep one belt fastened to the tower;
when climbing, unhook one belt and move it up on the tower, and then disconnect
the other only when the first is reattached. Be sure to inspect the belts prior to use.
Leather and metal wear out and break, and you do not want to find that failure at 50
ft up. Also, do not buy cheap belts.

28-28 Dangerous method for erecting tower.

Chap28_Carr

4/13/01

11:20 AM

Page 571

Installing vertical antennas 571

Next section

Gin pole

28-29 Proper tower installation
using gin pole.

Chap28_Carr

4/13/01

11:20 AM

Page 572

572 General antenna mechanical construction techniques

Guy wire

Guy wire

Turnbuckle
Strain relief

Strain relief

Turnbuckle

18
Inches

1 to 1.5 Inch
steel pipes
4 to 6 feet long
Buried
“dead man”

28-30 Ground stakes for guy wires.

29

CHAPTER

Grounding the antenna:
What is a good ground?
THE SUCCESS OR FAILURE OF A RADIO ANTENNA SYSTEM OFTEN (PERHAPS USUALLY)

hangs on whether or not it has a good RF ground. Poor grounds cause most antennas to operate at less than best efficiency. In fact, it is possible to burn up between
50 and 90 percent of your RF power heating the ground losses under the antenna, instead of propagating into the air. Ground resistances can vary from very low values
of 5 Ω, up to more than 100 Ω (5 to 30 Ω is a frequently quoted range). RF power is
dissipated in the ground resistance. The factors that affect the ground resistance include the conductivity of the ground, its composition, and the water content. The
ideal ground depth is rarely right on the surface, and depending on local water table
level might be a couple meters or so below the surface.
It is common practice among some amateur radio operators to use the building
electrical ground wiring for the RF antenna ground of their station. Neglecting to install an outdoor ground that will properly do the job, they opt instead for a single
connection to the grounded “third wire” in a nearby electrical outlet. Besides being
dangerous to work with, unless you know what you are doing, this is also a very poor
RF ground. It is too long for even the low RF bands, and radiates RF around the
house in large quantity. Stations that use the household electrical wiring as the radio
ground tend to cause TV interference, broadcast interference, and other electromagnetic interference both in their own building and in nearby buildings.
Fortunately, there are some fixes that will help your situation. We can reduce
the ground resistance by either altering the composition of the earth surrounding the
ground point, or by using a large surface area conductor as the ground point.
Figure 29-1 shows the traditional ground rod used on small radio stations, including amateur stations. Use either a copper (or copper-clad steel) rod at least 6 ft
long (8 ft preferred). Electrical supply houses, as well as amateur radio and communications equipment suppliers, also sell these ground rods. Do not use the nonclad

Copyright 2001 - the McGraw-Hill Companies

573

Chap29_Carr

4/10/01

3:58 PM

Page 574

574 Grounding the antenna: What is a good ground?
To transmitter
Ground

8-foot copper or
copper-clad
steel rod

29-1 Single ground rod works—
almost.

steel types sold by some electrical supply houses. They are usable by electricians
when making a service entrance ground on your home or workplace, but RF applications require the low skin resistance of the copper-clad variety. The rod need not
be all copper, because of skin effect forcing the RF current to flow only on the outer
surface of the rod. Try to use an 8-ft rod if at all possible, because it will work better
than the shorter kind. Do not bother with the small TV-antenna 4-ft ground rods;
they are next to useless for HF radio stations. Drive the ground rod into the earth until only 6 in or so remains above the surface. Connect a ground wire from your
station to the ground rod.
The ground wire should be as short as possible. Furthermore, it should be a lowinductance conductor. Use either heavy braid (or the outer conductor stripped from
RG-8 or RG-11 coaxial cable) or sheet copper. You can buy rolls of sheet copper from
metal distributors in widths from 4 in up to about 18 in. Some amateurs prefer to use
7-in-wide foil that is rated at a weight of 1 lb/linear ft. Sweat-solder the ground wire
to the rod. You can get away with using mechanical connections like the electricians
use, but you will eventually have to service the installation when corrosion takes its
toll. I prefer to use soldered connections, and then cover the joint with either
petroleum jelly or acrylic spray lacquer.
Another alternative is to use a copper plumbing pipe as the ground rod. The pipe
can be purchased in 8-ft through 16-ft lengths from plumbing supply shops or hardware stores. The pipe selected should be 3⁄4 in or larger. Some people report using up
to 2-in pipe for this application. The surface area of the hollow pipe is greater than
that of a solid rod of the same diameter. Because of certain current flow geometries
in the system, however, the ground resistance is not half the resistance of a rod of
the same diameter, but is nonetheless lower.
Driving a long pipe into the ground is not easily done. Unlike the copper-clad
steel rod, the pipe has no compression strength and will deform when you hit it
with a hammer or other driving tool. To overcome this problem (see Fig. 29-2)
you can use a garden hose as a water drill. Sweat solder a tee joint on the top end
of the pipe, and then sweat-solder a faucet fitting that matches the garden hose
end on one end of the tee joint. Cap off the other port of the tee joint. Use the tee

Chap29_Carr

4/10/01

3:58 PM

Page 575

Altering soil conductivity 575

Garden
hose

Faucet
fitting

Tee
End
cap

8-foot
copper pipe
29-2 Hose method of installing
ground pipe.

Bevel

Ground

joint as a handle to drive the pipe into the ground. When water pressure is applied, the pipe will sink into the ground as you apply a downward pressure on the
tee handle. In some cases, the pipe will slip into the ground easily, requiring only
a few minutes. In other cases, where the soil is hard or has a heavy clay content,
it will take considerably greater effort and more time. When you finish the task,
turn off the water and remove the garden hose. Some people also recommend
unsoldering and removing the tee joint.

Altering soil conductivity
The conductivity of the soil determines how well, or how poorly, it conducts electrical current (Table 29-1). Moist soil over a brackish water dome conducts best
(southern swamps make better radio station locations), and the sand of the western
deserts makes the worst conductor. Figure 29-3 shows a method for reducing the
soil electrical resistance by treating with one of two chemicals: copper sulfate or
common rock salt. The rock salt is one of several salt materials used for snow and ice
melting in snow-prone areas of the country. If you cannot locate rock salt in a hardware store, then look for a store that sells ice-cream-making supplies. Rock salt is a
principal ingredient in the process (but not the product).

Chap29_Carr

4/10/01

3:58 PM

Page 576

576 Grounding the antenna: What is a good ground?
Table 29-1. Sample soil conductivity values
Type of soil
Salt water
Fresh water
Pastoral hills
Marshy, wooded
Sandy
Cities

4- to 5-in
layer of
rock salt or
copper sulfate

Dielectric
constant

Conductivity
(siemens /meter)

Relative
quality

81
80
14–20
12
10
3–5

5
0.001
0.03–0.01
0.0075
0.002
0.001

Best
Very poor
Very good
Average/poor
Poor
Very poor

Ground rod

29-3A Ground rod with
“improved” ground.
6 to 10
in

Trench

29-3B Trenching pattern.
Ground
rod

Figures 29-3A and 29-3B show side and top views (respectively) of a slit trench
method of applying the chemical treatment. Dig a 6- to 10-in-deep trench, about 12 to
24 in from the ground rod. Fill that trench with a 4- or 5-in layer of rock salt or copper
sulfate. Cover the remaining depth with soil removed when you dug the trench. Water
the trench well for about 15 minutes. The treatment will need to be repeated every 12
to 36 months, depending upon local rainfall and soil composition.
Figure 29-3C shows an alternative method: the salt pipe. Use either copper or
PVC plumbing pipe, up to 4 in diameter (although 2 to 3 in is easier to work). The
overall length of the pipe should be at least 18 to 24 in, although longer is useful.

Chap29_Carr

4/10/01

3:58 PM

Page 577

Radials/counterpoise grounds 577
End cap

29-3C Slow release ground treatment
pipe.

2- or 3-in
copper or PVC
pipe filled
with rock salt or
copper sulfate

18 to 24 in

End cap

Drill a large number of small holes in the pipe (no hole over 3⁄8 in), sparing only the
end that will be above the surface. Fill with rock salt or copper sulfate and cap off
both ends.
Install several salt pipes around the ground rod. Installation is best accomplished with a fence posthole digger. Drop the salt pipe into the hole and backfill
with water. Remove the top endcap and hose down for about 15 minutes. Refill the
pipe occasionally to account for the salt leaching out.

Multiple ground rods
The key to a low-resistance ground is the surface area in contact with soil. One means
for gaining surface area, and thereby reducing ground resistance, is to use multiple
ground rods. Although multiple 4-ft rods are better than a single 4-ft ground rod, the
use of 6- or 8-ft rods is recommended even in cases where multiple rods are used.
Figure 29-4A shows the use of three ground rods in the same system. The 8-ft
rods are placed 12 to 18 in apart for low- and medium-power levels, and perhaps
30 in for higher amateur power levels. An electrical connection is made between
the rods on the surface using either copper stripping or copper braid. The connections are sweat-soldered in the manner described above, with the feedpoint at
the center rod.
Figure 29-4B shows a more complex system with a larger number of rods laid
out in an array. The rods are arrayed about 24 in apart. As in the previous case, the
rods are electrically connected (by braid or foil) on the surface. Again, connection to
the system is made from the rod at the geometric center of the array.

Radials/counterpoise grounds
The effectiveness of the ground system is enhanced substantially by the use of radials either above ground or buried under the surface. Figure 29-5 shows a vertical

Chap29_Carr

4/10/01

3:58 PM

Page 578

578 Grounding the antenna: What is a good ground?
To
XMTR
Braid

29-4A Multiple ground rod system.

Ground
rods

29-4B Connection scheme.

antenna with three different forms of radials: aboveground, subsurface, and ground
rod. It is not unreasonable to use both radials and a ground rod. Note (from Chap. 7)
that vertical antennas are relatively ineffective unless provided with a good ground
system, and for most installations that requirement is best met through a system of
ground radials.
An effective system of radials requires a large number of radials. Although as few
as two quarter-wavelength resonant radials will provide an improvement, the best performance is to use more. Broadcasters in the AM band (550 to 1640 kHz) are advised
to use 120 half-wavelength radials. Installing more than 120 radials is both expensive
and time-consuming, but does not provide any substantial improvement. For amateur and
small commercial stations, use a minimum of 16 quarter-wavelength radials.
Above ground, the use of insulated wire is recommended, but not required. Below ground, noninsulated wire is preferred. Although some sources claim that any

Chap29_Carr

4/10/01

3:58 PM

Page 579

Station grounding 579

Antenna element

Coax to
XMTR

Above ground
radials

29-5 Combining
ground rod and
buried radials.
Sod

Below ground
radials

Ground Rod

size wire from no. 26 up to no. 10 can be used, it is best to use larger sizes in that
range (i.e., no. 14 through no. 10). Either solid or stranded wire can be used.
The layout for a system of radials in a vertical antenna system is depicted in a
view from above in Fig. 29-6. Here, the radials are laid out in a uniform pattern around
the antenna element. This coverage provides both the lowest resistance and the best
radiation pattern for the antenna. Solder all radials together at a common point,
which might be the ground or mounting rod used to support the vertical antenna.

Station grounding
It does no good to provide a topflight ground system, such as those shown earlier in
this chapter, if the connection between the station equipment and the ground system is substandard. Figure 29-7 shows a method used by the author to good effect.
On the back of the operating position is a sheet of copper, 7 in wide, running the
length of the equipment platform. This form of copper, in the 1-lb/sq ft weight, is
used on older houses for roofing flashing. Each piece of equipment is connected to
the ground sheet through a short length of braid harvested from RG-8 or RG-11
coaxial cable shield. RF accessories, such as the low-pass TV interference filter (if
used—it should be) are mounted directly to the copper sheet. In one installation, the

Chap29_Carr

4/10/01

3:58 PM

Page 580

580 Grounding the antenna: What is a good ground?

Antenna

Radials

29-6 Radial pattern.

author was able to drop the copper sheet down from the table to connect directly to
the ground system outside the building. The run was less than 40 in. But in other
cases, a short length of braid wire will be more practical.

Tuning the ground wire
An alternative that some operators use is the ground wire tuner. These instruments
insert an inductor or capacitor (or a LC network) in series with the ground line. You

Chap29_Carr

4/10/01

3:58 PM

Page 581

Conclusion 581
Equipment

Tuner

Amplifier

XMTR

Low-pass filter Spout filter
29-7 Ground system inside shack.
7-in- wide
1-lb/sq ft
copper sheet

To
ground rod

adjust the ground line tuner for maximum ground current at the operating frequency. MFJ Electronics, Inc., Mississippi State, MS, makes one of these devices.

Conclusion
A high-quality, low-resistance ground might seem costly to install, but in reality it
pays rich dividends in the functioning of your antenna. Don’t overlook the quality of
the ground, or you might be in the position of being penny wise and pound foolish.

This page intentionally left blank

Index

Copyright 2001 - the McGraw-Hill Companies

This page intentionally left blank

1376860_Index_Carr

4/13/01

12:11 PM

Page 585

Note: boldface numbers indicate
illustrations; italic t indicates a
table.

A
absorbed power (Pa), transmission
lines, 113–114
absorption of microwaves, 38
Adcock antennas, 446–447, 448,
449
Adcock, F., 446
adjustable plunger or short-circuit
termination, microwave waveguides and antennas, 388, 388
adjustment techniques (See measurement and adjustment
techniques)
admittance, 100, 105, 112–114
air core frame loops (“box” loops),
303–305, 304
air-articulated line, 62–63, 63
airborne radio, 30
Alexanderson alternators, 2
aluminum vs. copper radiators, in
high–frequency dipoles and
doublets, 154
AM radio, 47, 55
Beverage or “wave” antenna in,
224–228, 226, 228, 229
vertically polarized HF antennas
in, 186
radio direction finding (RDF)
antennas in, 439

AM/FM broadcast antenna tower, 4
amateur radio, 2, 3, 29, 49, 55
loop antennas, small receiver-type
in, 302
multiband and tunable-wire
antennas in, 203
vertically polarized HF antennas
in, 176, 179, 186
ammeter, 530, 530
amplifier, for loop antennas, small
receiver-type, 313–316, 316
amplitude modulation (AM), 2, 8, 29
angle of incidence, 16, 16, 22
angle of radiation, 50, 214, 274, 274
angle of reflection, 16, 16, 75
angle of reflection coefficient, 103,
106, 112
angle of transmission coefficient
circle, Smith charts, 103, 106
angled or bent dipole antenna,
236–237, 240
antenna matching tuner, 281, 285
antenna noise temperature,
417–420
antenna tuning unit (ATU) (See
also tuning), 463–464, 464,
465
in (/2 large loop antennas, 287
in high–frequency dipoles and
doublets, 152, 172
in longwires, 214
in multiband and tunable-wire
antennas, 210

antenna tuning unit (ATU) (Cont.):
in vertically polarized HF
antennas, 173
antinodes, 87
aperture and aperture (slot) coupling, waveguides and antennas, 390–393, 393, 402–403
apex angle, rhombic beam longwire, 223
approximation, in high–frequency
dipoles and doublets, 142–143
arcing, 233
Armstrong oscillator circuit, 313,
315
array antennas:
branch feed systems for, 409, 412
corporate feed systems for, 409,
412
flatplate array antennas, 411, 413,
414, 415
phase shifting in, 409, 412, 413
slot array antennas, 411–413, 413
solid-state array antennas in,
408–411
Watson-Watt Adcock array antennas, 447–450, 449, 450
astronomy (See radio astronomy
antennas)
atmospheric layers and radio propagation, 14–16, 15, 18,
40–43,42
atmospheric pressure vs. radio
propagation, 25

585

1376860_Index_Carr

4/13/01

12:11 PM

Page 586

586 Index
attenuation, 9–10, 28, 32, 36, 82,
377
attic-installed antennas, 232–234,
233
auroral propagation, 54
automatic load control (ALC), 515
azimuth aspect, high–frequency
dipoles and doublets, 147

B
backlobes in microwave waveguides and antennas, 400, 400,
401
backscatter, 52
balanced transmission line, in
multiband and tunable-wire
antennas, 208–209, 209
(See also baluns)
baluns:
coaxial cable, 465, 466
in directional phased vertical
antennas, 249
in high–frequency dipoles and
doublets, 155, 171, 171
in longwires, 171, 171
multi-impedance, 476, 477
in multiband and tunable-wire
antennas, 208–209, 209, 210
strain relief for, 553–554, 554
tapped, 476, 477
in VHF/UHF transmitting/
receiving antennas, 341–346,
342, 343
bandwidth, 2
in loop antennas, small transmittertype, 320–321, 320
in VHF/UHF transmitting/receiving
antennas, 339
basic radio system, 515, 516
battery chargers/battery packs,
126, 493–494, 494
beam antennas:
cubical quad beam antennas,
263–267, 264, 266, 267
inverted bobtail curtain (Thorne
array) antenna, 267–269, 268,
269
quad beam VHF/UHF antenna,
356, 358, 359
VHF/UHF transmitting/receiving
antennas, 349–352, 351, 352
Yagi antennas, 257–262, 259, 265,
349–352, 351, 352

beam antennas (Cont.):
ZL-special beam antenna, 20-m,
262–263,262
beamwidth:
microwave waveguides and
antennas, 400, 400, 401
parabolic “dish” antennas, 407
bends in microwave waveguides
and antennas, 388–390, 389,
390
bent dipole antenna, 236–237, 240
Beverage or “wave” antenna,
224–228, 226, 228, 229
grounding of, 227–228, 228
installation of, 228
insulators in, 228
maximum effective length (MEL)
in, 227
steerable notch Beverage
antennas, 229, 229
Beverage, H.H., 225
Binns, Jack, first maritime radio
distress call, 1–2
bidirectionality of loopsticks in
RDF antennas, 441
bisquare loop large antenna,
296–297, 297
boundary conditions in microwave
waveguides and antennas,
375–376
“bowtie” dipoles, 154, 155, 156,
361, 362
“box” loops, 303–305
branch feed systems for array
antennas, 409, 412
bridges:
impedance bridges, 519–521, 520,
521
noise bridge, 521–522, 521, 522,
523
RF noise bridge, 522–527, 521
RF power measurement using,
532, 532
British Broadcasting Corporation
(BBC), 54
broadband impedance matching, in
high–frequency dipoles and
doublets, 146
broadbanded dipoles, 154–157
broadside radiation pattern in
directional phased vertical
antennas, 246
Brooke, E.F., 209

burn or shock hazard through
antennas, 191, 195, 215, 233,
276, 279
Byrne, John, 209

C
cable TV, 67
cage dipoles, 154, 155, 157, 157
call signs, 3
capacitance, 126, 138, 526–527
coaxial cable, 69
loop antennas, small receivertype, 317
loop antennas, small transmittertype, 321
transmission lines, 64
capacitance tuning of loop
antennas, small receiver-type,
307–309
capacitive (probe) coupling in
microwave waveguides and
antennas, 390–393, 392
capacitive antennas, 126
capacitive reactance, 140
in high–frequency dipoles and
doublets, 143
impedance matching and, 458
using Smith charts, 100, 102,
117
capacitors, 124–126, 124
in longwires, 215
in loop antennas, small receivertype, 304, 307–309
in loop antennas, small transmittertype, 320, 321
in Yagi antennas, 261
cardioid radiation pattern of sense
antenna in RDF antennas, 441,
442
Cartesian coordinate system used
in modeling software, 328, 329,
330
Cassegrain feed for parabolic “dish”
antennas, 408–409, 409
cavity antennas, 404, 405
center insulators, 548–550, 549,
550, 551
characteristic impedance (Zo), 516
of Beverage antenna, 226
of longwires, 223
of microwave waveguides and
antennas, 383–384
of transmission line, 64–67, 89

1376860_Index_Carr

4/13/01

12:11 PM

Page 587

Index 587
charge, 124–126, 124, 127,
131–137, 132, 133
charged solar particles vs. propagation, 39
choke joints in microwave waveguides and antennas, 389, 390
circular loop transmitter antenna,
323, 323
Citizens’ Band (CB) radio, 29, 48,
166, 176, 191, 341, 496
coaxial cable, 59, 61–62, 61, 62
baluns, 465, 466
capacitance in, 69
characteristic impedance of, 66
coaxial vertical scanner antenna
using, 365–368, 367, 368
cutoff frequency (Fo) of, 69
doping out, 437–438
Faraday connection in, 318
Faraday shield in, 318
length of, calculating, 438
loop antennas made using, 318,
318
losses in, 369, 438
matching section of, quarterwavelength coax, 292
multiband and tunable-wire
antennas and, 208
testing, 437–438, 437, 438
velocity factor (VF) of, 248
vertical coax VHF/UHF antenna,
346–349, 347, 348
coaxial vertical antennas, 191–194,
192, 193
coaxial vertical scanner antenna,
365–368, 367, 368
cochannel interference in loop
antennas, small receiver-type,
302
coil-loaded mobile antenna,
480–481, 480
collinear “Franklin” array antenna,
165–166, 166
collinear vertical VHF/UHF antenna,
349, 350
commercial operators, multiband
and tunable-wire antennas, 203
complex admittance, Smith charts,
105
complex conjugates in impedance
matching, 458
CONALRAD station frequencies,
439

conductance of transmission lines,
64
conductivity of soil, 27, 28t
cone of silence, 17
constant reactance circles, Smith
charts, 100–105
constant resistance circles, Smith
charts, 97–100, 99
construction techniques (See installation and construction
techniques)
constructive interference, 19
continuous loading in lowfrequency operation antennas,
503, 504–505, 506
continuous wave (CW), 55
continuous wave trains, 7, 7
coordinate system to denote
dimensions in microwave waveguides and antennas, 376–377,
377
coordinate system used in modeling software, 328, 329, 330
copper plumbing pipes as ground
rod, 574
copper sulfate to alter soil conductivity, 575–576
copperweld wire, 214
core material of transformers, 474
corner reflector antennas, 404,
405, 406
corona effects, 233
corporate feed systems for array
antennas, 409, 412
cosmic radiation noise, 37
counterpoise grounds, 577–579,
579
in emergency operations antennas,
487–488, 488
in longwire, 170–172, 171
coupling loop antennas, 306–307,
306
coupling methods for microwave
waveguides and antennas,
390–393
CQD/CQE distress calls, 2
critical angle, 48
critical frequency (Fc), 43, 44
cross–polarization, 13
cubical quad beam antennas,
263–267, 264, 266, 267, 421
current, 123, 126, 128, 129,
131–137, 132, 133

current (Cont.):
in directional phased vertical
antennas, 248
in (/2 large loop antennas, 289
in high–frequency dipoles and
doublets, 143–146, 143
in loop antennas, large designs,
299
in loop antennas, small receivertype, 299
in loop antennas, small transmittertype, 320
standing waves of, 134, 135, 136,
137, 139
in vertically polarized HF antennas,
173, 174
in loop antennas, small transmittertype, 323
current standing wave ratio
(ISWR), 88
current transformer wattmeter,
534–538, 535, 536, 537
cutoff frequency (Fc):
in microwave waveguides and
antennas, 381–383
in parabolic “dish” antennas, 406
cycles per second, 7

D
D layer of ionosphere, 41, 42, 46,
51
D loop (1) large antenna,
290–293, 291
damping, 6
dead zones, 23
Dellinger fade, 46–47
delta feed match systems:
in low-frequency operation
antennas, 507, 509
in VHF/UHF transmitting/receiving
antennas, 343, 344, 345
delta loop (1) large antenna,
290–293, 291, 295
delta-fed grounded vertical
antenna, 200–201, 200
demiquad loop large antenna, 293,
294
depth wound loop antennas, small
receiver-type, 303
design equations for loop antennas,
small transmitter-type,
321–322
destructive interference, 19

1376860_Index_Carr

4/13/01

12:11 PM

Page 588

588 Index
diamond loop (1) large antenna,
290–293, 291
dielectric constants, 138
dielectric loss, 369
dielectric properties of air, 29–30,
30
diffraction, 16–17, 17, 32–35
dip oscillator/dip meter, 527–529,
527, 528
dipoles and doublets, 141–172, 142
aluminum vs. copper radiators in,
154
angled or bent dipole, 236–237,
240
antenna tuning unit (ATU) for,
152, 172
approximation of, 142–143
attic installation of, 232–234, 233
azimuth aspect of, 147
baluns in, 155, 171, 171
“bowtie” dipoles in, 154, 155, 156,
361, 362
broadband impedance matching
in, 146
broadbanded dipoles in, 154–157
cage dipoles in, 154, 155, 157, 157
capacitive reactance in, 143
center insulators, 548–550, 549,
550, 551
collinear “Franklin” array antenna
in, 165–166, 166
counterpoise longwire in,
170–172, 171
current in, 143–146, 143
directivity in, 146–247
double dipoles in, 160
double extended Zepp antenna in,
164–165, 165
drooping dipole scanner antenna
in, 363, 363
electrical vs. physical length of,
141, 142–143, 149–151, 160,
162
emergency operations antennas,
490, 490
end or egg insulators, 551–553,
553
feedpoint in, 143–146, 256–257,
257
floor flanges mounting hardware
in, 256
folded dipole, 154–155, 156, 362,
362, 554–556, 555, 556

dipoles and doublets (Cont.):
gain in, 146–147
ground plane verticals in, 172
height of antenna vs. radiation
patterns in, 148–149, 148
height of antenna vs. resistance in,
145–146, 145
hidden and limited-space antennas,
232–234, 233
high-Q models of, 160
high–frequency dipoles and
doublets, 141–172, 142
impedance and impedance matching in, 143–146, 149, 151–152,
155, 237
inductive reactance in, 143, 157,
158t, 159–160, 161
installation plan for, 552
insulators for, 141, 256, 548–550,
549, 550, 551, 551–553, 553
inverted-vee dipole in, 152–153,
153, 490–491, 491
isotropic radiation in, 146
length of, 141, 142–143, 149–151,
160, 232, 255–257
limited-space designs for, 236–244
loading coils in, 157–160, 157
losses in, 143–146
microwave waveguides and antennas and, elements of, 396–398,
397, 399
mounting of, 141, 233, 256
multiband fan dipole in, 169–170,
170
off-center-fed full-wave doublet
(OCFD) in, 163, 163
off-center-fed nonresonant sloper
(OCFS), 164, 164
ohmic loss in, 143–146
ominidirectionality of, 146
phase reversal stubs in, 165
Q-factor in, 160
Q-sections in, 146
radiation patterns of, 146–152,
147
radiation resistance in, 143–146
radiators of, 141
reactance in, 143
resistance in, 143–146, 145
resonance in, 143, 149–151, 150,
237
rhombic inverted-vee antenna in,
169, 169

dipoles and doublets (Cont.):
right-angle flange mounting hardware in, 256
RLC networks and, 143
rotatable dipole antennas, 239,
242, 255–257, 257
shortened coil-loaded dipoles in,
157–160, 158
shortwave reception antennas,
272, 273, 274
sloping (“sloper” or “slipole”)
dipole in, 153–154, 154, 155,
236, 238
space diversity in, 160
stacked dipoles in, 160–163, 162
stagger tuning of, 157
standing waves and standing wave
ratio (SWR) in, 144
strain relief in, 553–554, 554
support ropes for, 551
three-dimensional (ideal) radiation pattern of, 147–148, 147
tilted, center-fed, terminated,
folded dipole (TCFTFD or T +
2 + FD, TTFD) in, 166–168
transformers for, 146
tunable dipoles in, 160
tuning of, 149–152
vee dipoles, 236, 239
vee-sloper antenna in, 168–169,
168
vertical dipole scanner antenna in,
364, 364, 365
vertical plane radiation pattern of,
148–149, 148
voltage in, 143–146, 143
voltage standing wave ratio
(VSWR) in, 144, 146, 149–151,
150, 160
wavelength measurement of,
141–142
wire antenna, basic design, 548,
548
Zepp antenna in, 164–165, 165,
171
direct vs. reflected space waves,
17–19, 18
direction of radio waves, 54
directional array, 360-degree
phased, 250–254,
253, 254t
directional beam antennas,
255–269

1376860_Index_Carr

4/13/01

12:11 PM

Page 589

Index 589
directional beam antennas (Cont.):
cubical quad beam antennas,
263–267, 264, 266, 267
directivity of, 255
effective radiated power (ERP) in,
255
electromagnetic interference
(EMI), 263
feedpoints, 256–257, 257
260–261, 261, 263, 265
floor flanges mounting hardware
in, 256
gamma match feed system for,
260–261, 261
insulators, 256
inverted bobtail curtain (Thorne
array) antenna, 267–269, 268,
269
length of, 255–257, 259–260
mounting of, 256
quad loop antennas in, 263–267,
264, 266, 267
right-angle flange mounting hardware in, 256
rotatable dipole as, 255–257, 257
Yagi antennas as, 257–262, 259,
265
Yagi-Uda antenna as, 258
ZL-special beam antenna, 20-m,
262–263,262
directional discontinuity ring radiator (DDRR) antenna, 424–427,
426, 427t
directional phased vertical antennas,
245–254
broadside radiation pattern
in, 246
current in, 248
directivity of, 246–250
effective radiated power (ERP) in,
245–246
feed phasing table for, 254t
feedpoint in, 247–248, 247, 248
length of, variable lengths in,
248–249, 249
noise in, 245
omnidirectionality of, 245
phase-shifting circuit for, 252
phasing in, 246–250
phasing switch in, 249–250, 252
radiation patterns in, 246–250,
246, 247
signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) in, 246

directional phased vertical
antennas (Cont.):
360-degree directional array, 250,
253, 254t
three-element, 250, 253
transformers in, 249–250, 250,
251
two-port phasing transformer for,
249–250, 250, 251
velocity factor (VF) of coax in, 248
directional wire antenna, for shortwave reception, 281–286, 284
directivity:
in directional beam antennas, 255
in directional phased vertical
antennas, 246–250
in high–frequency dipoles and
doublets, 146–247
in microwave waveguides and
antennas, 395, 397, 398–403,
400
in shortwave reception antennas,
272
in VHF/UHF transmitting/receiving
antennas, 349
directivity gain (Gd) in microwave
waveguides and antennas,
401–402
directors, Yagi antennas, 258–259
directrix, parabolic “dish” antennas,
404
discrete loading in low-frequency
operation antennas, 503,
504–505
dish antennas (See parabolic “dish”
antennas)
distance between antennas, 28
distance calculation, for radio,
26–27, 26
distress calls, 2
distributed capacitance, in loop
antennas, small transmittertype, 321
disturbance, ionospheric, 45–47
diurnal (See time–of–day
variations)
diversity propagation/reception,
55–58, 57, 58, 160
dominant mode in microwave
waveguides and antennas,
376–377
Doppler antennas, 450–451, 451
double dipoles, 160

double ducky direction finders
(DDDF), 455–456, 455
double extended Zepp antenna,
164–165, 165
double vee longwire antennas, 223
double-shielded coaxial, 63, 63
doublet antennas (See high–
frequency dipoles and doublets)
drooping dipole scanner antenna,
363, 363
drooping dipole multiband
antennas, 205
“drooping radials,” in vertically polarized HF antennas, 176, 177
ducting, 29–31, 31, 36
dummy loads, 385–388, 386,
540–542, 540, 541, 542
DXing using loop antennas, small
receiver-type, 311–313

E
E layer of ionosphere, 41, 42, 46
effective aperture (Ae), 11, 394,
407
effective Earth’s radius factor (K
factor), 23–27
effective height of antennas, 304
effective radiated power (ERP), 45
in directional beam antennas,
255
in directional phased vertical
antennas, 245–246
in microwave waveguides and
antennas, 401
in VHF/UHF transmitting/receiving
antennas, 349
efficiency, in loop antennas, small
transmitter-type, 321
E–field components, 27
electric field, 123, 124–126, 125,
127, 128
in longwires, 219
in microwave waveguides and
antennas, 383, 395–396
in vertically polarized HF antennas,
173
electrical installation, vertical
antennas, 560–561
electrical vs. physical length,
137–140, 139
of high–frequency dipoles and
doublets, 141–143, 149–151,
160, 162

1376860_Index_Carr

4/13/01

12:11 PM

Page 590

590 Index
electrical vs. physical length
(Cont.):
impedance matching and,
470–471
of longwires, 213–214, 217–219,
221
of transmission line, 67–68
electromagnetic fields, 8–16, 9,
123, 125–127
electromagnetic interference
(EMI), 263
electromagnetic radiation vs. propagation, 39
electromagnetic waves, 5
electrostatic fields/discharge, in
longwires, 219
eleven–year cycle of radio propagation, 46
EM Scientific, 331
emergency operations antennas,
485–493
battery packs for, 493–494, 494
counterpoise ground plane for,
487–488, 488
dipoles in, 490, 490
grounding and ground systems
for, 487–488
increasing signal strength from
portable/mobile stations for,
486
inverted-vee dipole in, 490–491,
491
mobile antennas and, 486–487,
487
mounting of, on vehicles, 491–492
multiple radials from vehiclemounted antenna for, 488, 489
radial-to-mobile-antenna connection detail in, 488, 489
repeaters and, 487
telescoping antennas for, 491
temporary antenna construction
for, 487–488, 488
temporary mast mount for, 492,
493
VHF band for, 487
end effect, 138–139
end or egg insulators, 551–553, 553
end plates/end terminators, in
microwave waveguides and
antennas, 385, 388, 388
end-fed longwire, 217–219, 217
end-fed Zepp antenna, 208, 208

environmental/natural noise
(QRN), 245
erecting antennas safely, 543–548
escape angle, 48
ether, 8
Everett, W.L., 209
Expert MiniNEC modeling software, 331
EZNEC for Windows modeling software, 331, 334–337, 335, 336,
337
EZNEC Professional modeling software, 329

F
F layer of ionosphere, 41–43, 42, 46
fading, 35–36, 35, 55–58, 55
Dellinger fade, 46–47
selective fading, 55
fan dipole, multiband, 169–170,
170
far field calculations in microwave
waveguides and antennas,
395–396
Faraday connection, 318
Faraday shield, 318
Federal Communications Commission (FCC), 2
feed geometries for parabolic “dish”
antennas, 408–409, 408, 409
feed illumination in parabolic “dish”
antennas, 406
feeding transformer, 476, 477
feedpoints:
/2 large loop antennas, 287–288
dipoles, 256–257, 257
directional beam antennas,
256–257, 257, 260–261, 261
directional phased vertical
antennas, 247–248, 247, 248
high–frequency dipoles and
doublets, 143–146
longwires, 217–218
multiband and tunable-wire
antennas, 204, 210
one/1 large loop antennas, 292
quad beam antennas, 263, 265
vertically polarized HF antennas,
197, 198
Yagi antennas, 260–261, 261
fence posts as supports for vertical
antennas, 561–565, 563, 564
ferrite core inductors, 471–477

ferrite rods, 475, 475
fiber optics, 370
field strength meters (FSM), for
mobile HF antennas, 483–485,
484, 485, 485t
field strength, 21, 22
figure of merit, 418
filters, 55, 515
five-eighths-wavelength antennas,
197–200
2-meter VHF/UHF antenna, 353,
354
vertical antenna, 181, 182
flagpole-installed antennas,
234–236, 235, 237
flatplate array antennas, 411, 413,
414, 415
flattop antennas, shortwave reception, 279, 280
floor flanges mounting hardware,
256
flux, magnetic, 126, 127
FM, marine radio antennas, 495
fold- or tilt-over tower, 567, 567
folded dipole, 154–155, 156
installation of, 554–556, 555, 556
tilted, center-fed, terminated,
folded dipole (TCFTFD or
T2FD, TTFD) in, 166–168,
167
VHF/UHF antennas, 362, 362
forward power, 538, 539
forward scatter, 52
“fox hunting” antenna, 444, 445
“Franklin” array antenna, 165–166,
166
free space, 14, 19, 21, 67–68,
137–138
free-space velocity (C) in microwave waveguides and antennas,
377, 380
frequency, 2, 7, 9
in microwave waveguides and
antennas, 373, 374, 375, 376,
380, 383–384, 384
using Smith charts, 117–121, 119,
120
tilt angle vs., 28, 28t
VHF/UHF transmitting/receiving
antennas, 339, 341
VSWR vs., 434–437, 435
frequency diversity, 36, 55, 57
frequency modulation (FM), 32

1376860_Index_Carr

4/13/01

12:11 PM

Page 591

Index 591
frequency of optimum traffic
(FOT), 45
Fresnel zones, 33–34, 34, 35
fundamentals of radio antennas,
123–140

G
G5RV multiband dipole antenna,
206–208, 207
gain:
in /2 large loop antennas,
288–289, 289
in high–frequency dipoles and
doublets, 146–147
in longwires, 214, 218, 218, 223
in loop antennas, small transmittertype, 319–320
in microwave waveguides and
antennas, 394–395, 398–403
in microwave waveguides and
antennas, vs. aperture in,
402–403
in parabolic “dish” antennas,
405–408
in shortwave reception antennas,
272
in vertically polarized HF antennas,
179–181
in VHF/UHF transmitting/receiving
antennas, 349
galactic noise, 39, 421
gamma match feed system:
in Yagi antennas, 260–261,
261
in VHF/UHF transmitting/receiving
antennas, 346, 346
gamma rays, 39
gamma-fed grounded vertical
antenna, 200–201, 201
gas-filled line, 62, 63
ghost radiator, vertically polarized
HF antennas, 173
gin pole to raise towers, 570, 571
Global Positioning System (GPS),
443
GNEC modeling software,
329–330
graphite-sand dummy load in
microwave waveguides and
antennas, 385
gray line transmission, 51, 53
great circle paths, 50–51, 52
grid dip meter, 527–529, 528

ground losses, vertically polarized
HF antennas, 183
ground plane vertical antennas,
172, 176, 177
ground rods, 573–574, 574, 575,
575, 577, 578
ground stakes and guy wires, 570,
572
ground wave, 17–29, 18, 47–48,
48, 302
ground-mounted vertical antennas,
561–565, 562
grounded vertical antennas,
200–201
grounding and ground systems,
573–581
in Beverage antenna, 227–228,
228
copper plumbing pipes as ground
rod, 574
copper sulfate to alter soil
conductivity in, 575–576
counterpoise grounds, 577–579,
579
in emergency operations antennas,
487–488
ground rods for, 573–574, 574,
574–575, 575, 577, 578
in hidden and limited-space
antennas, 238–239
impedance matching and,
459–460
interference and, 573
length of ground wires in, 574
in longwires, 215–216, 216
in low-frequency operation antennas, 501–502, 502
in marine radio antennas,
495–496, 495, 496
radials for, 577–579, 579, 580
“salt pipe” to apply chemical soilconductivity improvers,
576–577, 577
salt to alter soil conductivity in,
575–576
in shortwave reception antennas,
276, 277, 278–279, 279
soil conductivity and, altering,
575–577, 576t, 576, 577
station grounding, 579–580, 581
trenching to apply chemical soilconductivity improvers,
576, 576

grounding and ground systems
(Cont.):
tuning ground wire, 580–581
in vertically polarized HF antennas, 176, 185–187, 195–197,
196
groundplane VHF/UHF antenna,
356, 357
groundplane scanner antenna, 364,
366
group velocity (Vg) in microwave
waveguides and antennas,
377–379
Grover’s equation, for loop antennas, small receiver-type,
302–303, 303t
guy wires and ground stakes, 570,
572

H
“hairpin” loading scheme, 505, 506
half-delta sloper (HDS), 295–296,
296
half-slope vertical antenna, 238,
240
half-wave antennas, 126, 181, 182
current distribution in, 131–137,
132, 133
electric vs. physical length of
antenna, 137–139, 139
impedance matching in, 139–140,
139
standing waves and, 129
voltage distribution in,131–137,
132, 133
half-wavelength line, 83
halo VHF/UHF antenna, 356, 358
hardline, 62, 62
harmonics, 140, 209, 210, 515
height of antenna, 19, 20, 25, 28
distance calculation for, 26–27, 26
in high–frequency dipoles and
doublets, vs. radiation patterns in, 148–149, 148
in high–frequency dipoles and
doublets, vs. resistance in,
145–146, 145
in loop antennas, small receivertype, 304
in vertically polarized HF antennas,
181, 187
helical antennas, 427–428, 429
helical line, 62

1376860_Index_Carr

4/13/01

12:11 PM

Page 592

592 Index
helical whip mobile antenna, 481,
482
helically wound antennas, 239, 242,
243
hertz as unit of frequency, 7
Hertz or hertzian antenna (See
high–frequency dipoles and
doublets)
Hertz, Heinrich, 5, 7
heterodyning, 55
hidden and limited-space antennas,
231–244
angled or bent dipole, 236–237,
240
attic-installed, 232–234, 233
dipoles as, 232–234, 233, 236
flagpole installation for, 234–236,
235, 237
ground system for, 238–239
half-slope vertical antenna as, 238,
240
helically wound antennas as, 239,
242, 243
L-section couplers in, 238–239
limited-space designs for, 236–244
longwires as, 232
mobile antenna used as windowsillmounted, 239, 241
mounting of, 233
nonresonant loop antennas as,
234–235, 234
rotatable dipole antennas as, 239,
242
safety issues for, 233
sloping (“sloper” or “slipole”)
dipole as, 236, 238
vee dipoles as, 236, 239
voltage standing wave ratio
(VSWR) in, 238
window-sill antennas as, 238, 241
high frequency (HF), 3, 13, 17, 29,
35, 37, 41, 48, 61, 170–171, 203,
479–485
high-frequency dipoles and doublets (See dipoles and doublets)
high-power RF wattmeters, 538,
538
high-Q dipoles and doublets, 160
hinged baseplate tower, 566–567,
538
history of radio broadcasting and
communications, 1–4
hopping, 36

horizontal low-frequency operation
antennas, 505
horizontal polarization, 12–13, 13,
27, 55, 173
Beverage antenna and, 226–227
helically wound antennas and,
239, 242, 243
horn antenna radiators, 403–404,
403
Huygens–Fresnel wave theory, 32

I

I2R losses in microwave waveguides
and antennas, 385
image antenna, vertically polarized
HF antennas, 173
imaginary operator (j), 22
impedance and impedance matching, 140, 433, 457–477,
525
antenna tuners for, 463–464, 464,
465
in antennas, 139, 139
approaches to, 458–462, 458
in Beverage antenna, 226
capacitive reactance in, 458
characteristic impedance (Zo) of
transmission line and, 64–67
in coaxial cable baluns, 465, 466
complex conjugates in, 458
in dipoles, 237
electrical vs. physical length calculations in, 470–471
feeding transformer for, 476,
477
ferrite core inductors in, 471–477
ferrite rods in, 475, 475
grounding and, 459–460
in high–frequency dipoles and
doublets, 143–146, 149,
151–152, 155
impedance bridges in, 519–521,
520, 521
impedance matching network
(Q sections) in, 85
inductive reactance in, 458
L-section network for, 458–460,
459
in /2 large loop antennas,
287–288
in longwires, 214, 223
in low-frequency operation
antennas, 505

impedance and impedance matching (Cont.):
matching stub systems for,
465–466, 466, 467
matching units for, 515
in microwave waveguides and
antennas, 383–384, 384, 394,
396
multi-impedance balun for, 476,
477
in multiband and tunable-wire
antennas, 210
noise and, 417–418
normalization of impedance in,
469–470
in 1 large loop antennas,
292–293, 292
pi networks for, 461, 461
quarter-wave matching (Q section) sections for, 467–468,
468, 469
radials in, 460
series matching section for,
468–471
using Smith charts, 110–112, 111,
115, 119–121, 119
using Smith charts, impedance
radius in, 100
using Smith charts, normalized
impedance line in, 95–97, 98
SPC transmatch network in, 463,
463
split-capacitor networks for,
461–462, 462
stub matching systems for, 115
tapped balun for, 476, 477
tee-network transmatch for, 463,
463
toroid broadbanded transformers
for, 475–477, 476
toroid cores and, 471, 472
toroidal transformers and,
471–475, 472
in towers, 507, 508
transmatch circuits for, 462–471,
462
in transmission lines, 71, 72,
82–86, 109, 110–112, 111, 112
in vertically polarized HF antennas, 173, 175–176, 183, 184,
186, 195–197, 199–200, 199
in VHF/UHF transmitting/receiving
antennas, 341–346, 342

1376860_Index_Carr

4/13/01

12:11 PM

Page 593

Index 593
impedance and impedance matching (Cont.):
Wheatstone bridge in, 519–521,
520
in Yagi antennas, 260–261, 261
impedance bridges, 519–521, 520,
521
incident angle, 48
incident power (PI ) of transmission
lines, 89
incident waves, 128, 134
index of refraction, 23–24
inductance, 526–527
ferrite core inductors in,
471–477
Grover’s equation in, 302–303,
303t
in longwires, 214
in loop antennas, small receivertype, 307
in loop antennas, small transmittertype, 321
in transmission lines, 64
induction fields, 5, 123, 127
inductive (loop) coupling in
microwave waveguides and
antennas, 390–393, 393
inductive loading in low-frequency
operation antennas, 503,
504–505
inductive reactance, 140
in high–frequency dipoles and
doublets, 143, 157, 158t,
159–160, 161
impedance matching and, 458
in /2 large loop antennas,
288–289, 289
in loop antennas, small transmittertype, 319, 321
using Smith charts, 100, 101, 117
infrared (IR) radiation, 9
installation and construction techniques, 433–438, 543–572
center insulators, 548–550, 549,
550, 551
electrical installation, vertical
antennas, 560–561
end or egg insulators, 551–553,
553
fence posts as supports for vertical antennas, 561–565, 563,
564
fold- or tilt-over tower, 567, 567

installation and construction
techniques (Cont.):
folded dipole installation,
554–556, 555, 556
four/4x4 support posts for, 565,
565
gin pole to raise towers, 570, 571
ground-mounted vertical antennas,
561–565, 562
guy wires and ground stakes, 570,
572
hinged baseplate tower, 566–567,
538
insulators, 548–550, 549, 550,
551–553, 551, 553
mast-mounted vertical antenna,
546, 560–561, 546, 561, 562
masts and supports, 556–559,
557, 558
pedestals for towers, 568–570,
569
permits, zoning, and regulations,
547–548
pulley system for mounting,
557–558, 558
raising towers, 570, 570, 571
safety issues, 543–548
slip-up tower, 567–568, 568, 569
stirrup-end mounting hardware,
558, 559
strain relief, 553–554, 554
support ropes, 551
suburban lot installation plan, 545
tower installation, 565–572, 538
U-bolt mounting hardware, 558,
559
vertical antenna installation,
560–572
wire antenna, basic design, 548,
548
insulators (or spreaders), 548–550,
549, 550, 551, 551–553, 553
in Beverage antenna, 228
in dipoles, 256
in directional beam antennas, 256
in high–frequency dipoles and
doublets, 141
in microwave waveguides and
antennas, 371–372
in multiband and tunable-wire
antennas, 206
in vertically polarized HF antennas,
175, 195

intensity of radio waves, 9–10
interference, 19, 36, 36, 37, 573
electromagnetic interference
(EMI), 263
in longwires, 214
in loop antennas, small receivertype, 302
in microwave waveguides and
antennas, 400–401
in shortwave reception antennas,
272, 273, 274
interferometer antennas, 431, 431,
432
intermediate frequency (IF), 55
International Telecommunications
Union (ITU), 2
inverse square law (1/D2), 9–10,
11, 369–370
inverted bobtail curtain (Thorne
array) antenna, 267–269, 268,
269
inverted-L antenna, 510, 510
inverted-vee antenna, rhombic,
169, 169
inverted-vee dipole, 152–153, 153
emergency operations antennas,
490–491, 491
multiband and tunable-wire
antennas, 205, 206
ionization, 5, 14–16, 15, 18, 37, 41,
46, 47, 51, 52, 54
ionograms, 43
ionosphere, 14–16, 15, 18, 37,
40–43, 42, 176
ionospheric disturbances,
45–47
ionospheric propagation, 17–18, 18,
37–43, 176
ionospheric scatter propagation,
51–54, 53
ionospheric storms, 47
ionospheric variation, 45–47
iosthermal region of atmosphere,
14, 15
isophase plane, 32
isopotential line, loop antennas,
small receiver-type, 303
isoresistance circles, using Smith
charts, 97–100, 99
isotropic antenna waveguide,
394–403
backlobes in, 400, 400, 401
beamwidth in, 400, 400, 401

1376860_Index_Carr

4/13/01

12:11 PM

Page 594

594 Index
isotropic antenna waveguide
(Cont.):
dipole antenna elements and,
396–398, 397, 399
directivity in, 397, 398–403, 400
gain in, 398–403
gain vs. aperture in, 402–403
impedance in, 396
interference and, 400–401
near field and far field calculations
in, 395–396
ohmic loss in, 396
radiation patterns and, 397, 398
radiation resistance in, 396
sidelobes in, 400, 400, 401
isotropic radiation:
in high–frequency dipoles and
doublets, 146
in microwave waveguides and
antennas, 394
in shortwave reception antennas,
272
in vertically polarized HF antennas,
179–181, 181
isotropic sources, 10–14
ISWR (See current standing
wave ratio)

J
J-pole antennas, 201, 353–355,
355
Jansky, Carl, 421
JFET amplifier for loop antennas,
small receiver-type, 313–316,
316
Johnson noise, 417
joints and bends in microwave
waveguides and antennas,
388–390, 389, 390
Jupiter reception antenna,
421–422, 423

K
K factor, 23–27
kilohertz as unit of frequency, 7
Ku bands, 69

L
L-section coupler, 214, 215,
238–239
L-section network for impedance
matching, 458–460, 459
lag, voltage, 126

/2 large loop antennas, 287–289,
288, 289
/4 inverted-L antenna, 510, 510
Law of Reciprocity, 226, 271, 394
LC tank circuit, 526, 526
leakage resistance, 140
left-hand rule, 126, 127
length of antenna elements:
in coaxial cable, 438
in dipoles, 141, 142–143, 149–151,
160, 232, 255–256
in directional beam antennas,
255–257, 259–260
in directional phased vertical antennas, variable lengths in,
248–249, 249
in high–frequency dipoles and
doublets, 141, 142–143,
149–151, 160, 232, 255–256
in longwires, 213–215, 218–219,
218, 221, 223
in low-frequency operation
antennas, 504
in microwave waveguides and
antennas, 392
in multiband and tunable-wire
antennas, 204
in vertical antennas, 504
in vertically polarized HF antennas,
181, 183, 184
in VHF/UHF transmitting/receiving
antennas, 339
in Yagi antennas, 259–260
Lewallen, Roy, 329, 331, 334
licensing, 3
light, speed, 8, 9, 13–14, 39, 525
limited-space antennas, 231–244
line attenuation constant, 82
line flattener tuner for marine radio
antennas, 500, 500
line-of-sight transmission, 19, 20,
23–24, 23, 35, 339
linear loading in low-frequency
operation antennas, 504–505
linearly loaded tee antenna, 511,
512
link-tuned dipole, multiband and
tunable-wire antennas, 205
loaded tower designs, 507
loading, 503, 504–505, 506
automatic load control (ALC), 515
in low-frequency operation antennas, 503, 504–505, 506

loading (Cont.):
in low-frequency operation antennas, loaded tower designs for,
507
loading coils, dipoles and doublets
in, 157–160, 157
long path transmission, 51
long wave band, 8
longwires, 213–229
angle of radiation in, 214
antenna tuning unit (ATU) in,
172, 214
apex angle in, 223
baluns in, 171, 171
Beverage or “wave” antenna in,
224–228, 226, 228, 229
capacitors for, 215
characteristic impedance in, 223,
226
counterpoise, 170–172, 171
double vee antennas, 223
electrical vs. physical length of,
213–214, 217, 218–219, 221
electrostatic fields and electric
charge in, 219
end-fed longwire, 217–219, 217
feedpoint in, 217–218
flagpole installation of, 234–236,
235, 237
gain in, 214, 218, 218, 223
ground plane verticals in, 172
grounding of, 215–216, 216
as hidden and limited-space
antennas, 232
impedance and impedance
matching in, 214, 223, 226
inductors for, 214
interference and, 214
L-section coupler for, 214, 215
length of, 213–215, 218–219, 218,
221, 223
as marine radio antennas, 497,
498
maximum effective length (MEL)
in, 227
as multiband and tunable-wire
antennas, 209, 210
non-resonant single-wire longwire
antennas in, 220
nonresonant vee beams,
223, 224
quarter-wavelength, 214, 217
radials for, 215

1376860_Index_Carr

4/13/01

12:11 PM

Page 595

Index 595
longwires (Cont.):
radiation patterns in, 219, 220,
220–221, 222
random-length type, 213–214, 214
resonant vs. non-resonant types
in, 213
rhombic beam, 221, 223–224,
225
safety issues in, 215
as shortwave reception antennas,
277–278, 278
as standing wave antennas, 220
steerable notch Beverage antennas
and, 229, 229
terminated antennas as, 220, 221
tilt angle in, 223
transmission line for, 217–218
traveling wave antennas in, 220,
223
true longwire antenna, 217–219,
217
tuning of, 214, 215, 215
vee beam, 221–223, 222
VHF/UHF transmitting/receiving
antennas, 340–341
voltage standing wave ratio
(VSWR) in, 215
wavelength-measurement in, 217,
218–219
window-sill antennas, 238, 241
wire used in, 214
Zepp antenna in, 164–165, 165
“looking in” impedance, 82–86, 372
loop antennas, 129, 131
loop antennas, large design,
287–297, 299
(See also loop antennas, small
receiver-type; loop antennas,
small transmitter-type)
antenna tuning unit (ATU) in, 287
bisquare loop large antenna,
296–297, 297
current in, 289
delta loop (1) large antenna,
290–293, 291
delta loop large antenna, 293, 295
demiquad loop antenna, 293, 294
diamond loop (1) large antenna,
290–293, 291
feedpoints in, 287–288, 292
gain in, 288–289, 289
half-delta sloper (HDS), 295–296,
296

loop antennas, large design (Cont.):
impedance and impedance matching in, 292–293, 292
impedance in, 287–288
inductive reactance in, 288–289,
289
/2 large loop antennas in,
287–289, 288, 289
loss in, 288–289, 289
nulls in, 299–300, 300, 301
(1) large loop antennas,
290–293, 290, 291
orthogonal lobes in, 299–300, 300,
301
radiation patterns in, 287,
299–300, 300, 301
square loop (1) large antenna,
290–293, 290
loop antennas, small receiver-type,
299–318
(See also loop antennas, large
design; loop antennas, small
transmitter-type)
air core frame loops (“box” loops)
in, 303–305, 304
amateur radio, 302
amplifier for, 313–316, 316
angle of arrival of signal in, voltage
vs., 303, 305
Armstrong oscillator circuit for,
313, 315
capacitance and capacitors in,
304, 307–309, 317
capacitance tuning of, 307–309
coaxial cable loop antennas, 318,
318
cochannel interference, 302
coupling loops in, 306–307, 306
current in, 299
depth wound loops in, 303
DXing using, 311–313
effective height of, 304
Faraday connection and Faraday
shield in, 318
Grover’s equation in, 302–303, 303t
height of, 304
inductance in, 307
isopotential line in, 303
low frequency (LF), 302
nulls in, 299–300, 300, 301, 303,
305
parallel tuning of, 307–309, 308
planar windings in, 303

loop antennas, small receiver-type
(Cont.):
preamplifiers for, 304
Q–multipliers for, 313, 315
radiation patterns in, 299–300,
300, 301, 303, 313
radio direction finding (RDF)
using, 301
remote tuning in, 307–309, 310
self-resonant point in, 317, 317
series resonant tuning in,
307–309, 308
shape constants in, 303, 303t
sharpening of, 313
shielded loop antennas as,
309–311, 311, 312
split frequencies in, 302
spoiler loop for, 313, 314
sports fan’s loop as, 309
transformer loops in, 306–307, 306
triangulation of radio signal using,
302
tuning of, 304, 307–309, 308,
312–313
UHF, 302
use of, 311–313
varactor tuning in, 309, 310
VHF, 302
VLF/LF loops, special problems in,
317
voltage in, 303, 304
loop antennas, small transmittertype, 319–325
(See also loop antennas, large
designs ; loop antennas, small
receiver-type)
bandwidth of, 320–321
capacitance and capacitors in,
320–321
capacitor voltage in, 321
circular loop transmitter antenna
as, 323, 323
current in, 320, 323
design equations for, 321–322
distributed capacitance in, 321
efficiency in, 321
gain in, 319–320
inductance in, 321
inductive reactance in, 319, 321
loss resistance in, 321
octagonal loop transmitter antenna in, 319, 320, 322, 322,
323, 324

1376860_Index_Carr

4/13/01

12:11 PM

Page 596

596 Index
loop antennas, small transmittertype (Cont.):
Patterson octagonal loop transmitter antenna as, 322, 322
quality factor (Q) in, 320–321
radiation patterns in, 324, 325
radiation resistance in, 319, 321
resistance in, 319, 321
square loop transmitter antenna
in, 319, 320
tuning capacitance in, 320–321
voltage in, 320, 323
voltage standing wave ratio
(VSWR) in, 320
loss, 11–12, 19, 27, 140
in coaxial cable, 438
in high–frequency dipoles and
doublets, 143–146
in /2 large loop antennas,
288–289, 289
loss coefficient scale in, 109
in microwave waveguides and
antennas, 396
in multiband and tunable-wire
antennas, 210
in Smith charts, 108–109
in transmission lines, 83–84,
91–94, 369
in vertically polarized HF antennas, 183
loss coefficient scale, 109, 112–113
loss resistance, in loop antennas,
small transmitter-type, 321
lossy circuits, Smith charts, 117,
118
low frequency (LF), 421
loop antennas, small receivertype, 302
low-frequency operation antennas, 501–513
VHF/UHF transmitting/receiving
antennas vs., 339
low-frequency operation antennas,
501–513
continuous loading in, 503,
504–505, 506
delta feed systems in, 507, 509
discrete loading in, 503, 504–505
grounding and ground systems
for, 501–502, 502
“hairpin” loading scheme in, 505,
506
impedance matching in, 505

low-frequency operation antennas
(Cont.):
impedance matching in, of towers,
507, 508
inductance loading of vertical
antennas in, 503
inductive loading in, 503, 504–505
inverted-L antenna for, 510, 510
/4 inverted-L antenna for, 510,
510
length of vertical antenna in, 504
linear loading in, 503, 504–505
linearly loaded tee antenna for,
511, 512
loaded tower designs for, 507
loading in, 503, 504–505, 506
radial layout for, 502, 502
random-length Marconi antenna
for, 507–510, 509
shortened horizontal antennas for,
505
shortened tee antenna, 511, 513
shortened vertical antennas for,
502–505, 503
shunt feed systems in, 507
lower sideband (LSB), 55
lowest usable frequency (LUF), 45

M
magnetic fields, 123, 126, 127, 128,
in microwave waveguides and
antennas, 375–376, 375, 383,
395–396
magnetic flux, 126, 127
man-made noise (QRM), 245
Marconi, Guglielmo, 1
marine radio antennas, 1–2,
494–497, 497
Citizens Band radios and, 496
grounding and ground systems
for, 495–496, 495, 496
HF SSB mode in, 495
line flattener tuner for, 500, 500
longwire antennas, 497, 498
tuners, 497–500, 499, 500
VHF-FM use in, 495
whip antennas for, 496–497, 497
mast-mounted vertical antenna,
546, 546, 560–561, 561, 562
masts and supports, 556–559, 557,
558
matching section, quarterwavelength coax, 292

matching stub systems, 465–466,
466, 467
maximum effective length (MEL),
227
maximum usable frequency (MUF),
43–45, 47
Maxwell’s equations, 8–9
measurement and adjustment techniques, 433–438, 515–542
antenna adjustment in, 523–524
automatic load control (ALC) in,
515
basic radio system in, 515, 516
bridge to measure RF power in,
532, 532
capacitance measurement in,
526–527
current transformer wattmeter in,
534–538, 535, 536, 537
dip oscillator/dip meter in,
527–529, 527, 528
dummy loads in, 540–542, 540,
541, 542
filters in, 515
forward power in, 538, 539
grid dip meter in, 527–529, 528
harmonics in, 515
high-power RF wattmeters for,
538, 538
impedance bridges in, 519–521,
520, 521
impedance in, 525
inductance measurement in,
526–527
LC tank circuit in, 526, 526
matching unit in, 515
micromatch wattmeter in, 533,
533
monomatch wattmeter in,
533–534, 534
nonresonant antenna adjustment
in, 524–525
parallel resonant circuits in, 526
power in, 515, 531–532
power-frequency calibration in,
538, 538
reactance testing/adjustment in,
524
reflected power in, 538, 539
resistance testing/adjustment in,
523–524
resonance testing/adjustment in,
524

1376860_Index_Carr

4/13/01

12:11 PM

Page 597

Index 597
measurement and adjustment
techniques (Cont.):
RF noise bridge in, 521–522, 521
RF power measurements in,
529–539
RF wattmeters for, 529–539, 531
series tuned circuits in, 526
surge impedance (Zo) in, 516
thermocouple for RF ammeter in,
530, 530
transmission lines in, 516–517, 525
tuned circuit measurements in,
526
tuning antennas in, 524
voltage measurement in, 531
voltage standing wave ratio
(VSWR) in, 515, 517–519, 529,
532
Wheatstone bridge in, 519–521,
520
medium wave (MW), 8, 17, 29, 48,
61, 224–228, 226, 228, 229
meteor scatter propagation, 54
micromatch wattmeter, 533, 533
microwave transmissions, 3, 5, 8,
13, 17, 18, 19, 22, 23, 29, 30, 32,
37, 40, 61, 69, 369
microwave waveguides and antennas , 369–415, 421
(See also parabolic “dish”
antennas)
adjustable plunger or short-circuit
termination in, 388, 388
antenna design using, 394
aperture (slot) coupling in,
390–393, 393
aperture in, 402–403
array antennas in, 409–411
attenuation in, 377
backlobes in, 400, 400, 401
beamwidth in, 400, 400, 401
boundary conditions in, 375–376
branch feed systems for, 409, 412
capacitive (probe) coupling in,
390–393, 392
cavity antennas, 404, 405
characteristic impedance in,
383–384
choke joints in, 389, 390
coordinate system to denote
dimensions in, 376–377, 377
corner reflector antennas, 404,
405, 406

microwave waveguides and
antennas (Cont.):
corporate feed systems for, 409,
412
coupling methods for, 390–393
cutoff frequency (Fc) in, 381–383
dielectric loss, 369
dipole antenna elements and,
396–398, 397, 399
directivity gain (Gd) in, 401–402
directivity in, 395, 397, 398–403,
400
dominant mode in, 376–377
dummy loads in, 385–388, 386
effective aperture (Ae) in, 394
effective radiated power (ERP) in,
401
electric fields in, 383, 395–396
end plate in, 385, 388, 388
flatplate array antennas, 411, 413,
414, 415
free-space velocity (C) in, 377, 380
frequency in, 373, 374, 375, 376,
380, 383–384, 384
gain in, 394, 395, 398–403
gain vs. aperture in, 402–403
graphite-sand dummy load in, 385
group velocity (Vg ) in, 377,
378–379
horn antenna radiators in,
403–404, 403
I2R losses in, 385
impedance and impedance matching in, 383–384, 394, 396
inductive (loop) coupling in,
390–393, 393
insulators in, 371–372
interference and, 400–401
inverse square law (1/D 2 ),
369–370
isotropic antenna waveguide,
394–403
isotropic radiation in, 394
joints and bends in, 388–390, 389,
390
law of reciprocity and, 394
length in, 392
losses in, 396
magnetic fields in, 375–376, 375,
383, 395–396
materials used in, 370
near field and far field calculations
in, 395–396

microwave waveguides and
antennas (Cont.):
ohmic loss in, 369, 371, 396
parabolic “dish” antennas as,
404–409, 407, 408, 409
phase shifting in, 409, 412, 413
phase velocity (Vp) in, 377, 379,
380
pipe analogy of, 369–370, 370
power gain (Gp) in, 401–402
propagation constant (B) in, 384
propagation modes in, 373–381
quarter-wavelength shorted stub
vs., 372–373, 372, 373, 374
radiating vs. nonradiating slots in,
393
radiation loss in, 369, 372
radiation patterns and, 397, 398
radiation resistance in, 396
rectangular waveguide using
parallel transmission lines and,
370–373, 371
reflector antennas, 404, 405, 406
resistive vane dummy load in, 385
rotating joints in, 390, 391
safety issues, 413–415
semipermanent joints in, 389
shielding in, 392
sidelobes in, 400, 400, 401
skin effect in, 369, 371
slot array antennas in, 411–413,
413
solid-state array antennas in,
408–411
terminations for, 385–388
transducer action of, 394
transverse electric mode (TE
mode) in, 375
transverse electromagnetic (TEM)
fields in, 373
transverse magnetic mode (TM
mode) in, 375
velocities in, 377–381, 378
voltage standing wave ratio
(VSWR) in, 388
wavelength in, 377–381, 378
wedge dummy loads in, 385, 386,
387
military radio, multiband and
tunable-wire antennas, 203
MiniNEC modeling software, 331
miniNEC-3/miniNEC-4 for modeling software, 328–329

1376860_Index_Carr

4/13/01

12:11 PM

Page 598

598 Index
“mirroring” of radio waves, 43, 54
mismatch (VSWR) losses, transmission lines, 91–94
mixing, 55
mobile HF antennas, 479–485
coil-loaded antenna as, 480–481,
480, 351
field strength meters (FSM) for,
483–485, 484, 485, 485t
helical whip antenna as, 481, 482
multiband top-loaded antenna as,
481, 482
Q factor in, 483
radial-to-mobile-antenna connection detail in, 488, 489
resonance in, 483
top-loaded antenna as, 481, 482
tuning of, 483–485
voltage standing wave ratio
(VSWR) in, 483
used as windowsill-mounted, 239,
241
modeling software for antennas,
327–338
coordinate system used in, 328,
329, 330
Expert MiniNEC, 331
EZNEC for Windows, 331,
334–337, 335, 336, 337
EZNEC Professional, 329
GNEC, 329–330
MiniNEC, 331
miniNEC-3/miniNEC-4, 328–329
NEC-2, 330
NEC4Win95, 331
NECWin Basic, 331–334, 332
NECWin Plus, 330–331
Numerical Electromagnetic Computation (NEC) programs in,
328
radiation patterns displayed in
EZNEC for Windows, 336–337,
337
radiation patterns displayed in
NECWin Basic, 332, 333, 334
voltage standing wave ratio
(VSWR) modeling in, 333, 335
voltage standing wave ratio
(VSWR) modeling in, 337, 338
monomatch wattmeter, 533–534,
534
monopulse feeds, parabolic “dish”
antennas, 409, 410

monthly variations in radio propagation, 46
Morse code, 1, 2
mounting (See also construction
and installation techniques)
Beverage antenna, 228
dipole, 233, 256
directional beam antenna, 256
emergency operations antenna, on
vehicles, 491–492
fence posts as supports for
vertical antenna, 561–565,
563, 564
floor flanges in, 256
hidden and limited-space antenna,
233
high–frequency dipole and
doublet, 141
mast-mounted vertical antenna,
546
pulley system for, 557–558, 558
right-angle flange hardware in,
256
shortwave reception antenna,
277–278, 278
stirrup-end hardware in, 558, 559
temporary mast mount for
emergency antenna, 492, 493
U-bolt hardware, 558, 559
vehicle-mounted emergency
antenna, 491–492
vertically polarized HF antenna,
186, 189–190, 194–195, 194,
195–197, 196, 560–565, 561
VHF/UHF transmitting/receiving
antenna, 347
multi-impedance balun, 476, 477
multiband and tunable-wire
antennas, 203–212
antenna tuning unit (ATU) for,
210
balanced transmission line and,
208
balancing line, 208–209, 209
baluns for, 208–209, 209, 210
coaxial cable in, 208
dipoles in, 204–205, 205
end-fed Zepp antenna in, 208, 208
feeding parallel transmission line
for, 208–212
feedpoint in, 204, 210
G5RV multiband dipole antenna
in, 206–208, 207

multiband and tunable-wire
antennas (Cont.):
harmonics in, 210
impedance in, 210
insulators (spreaders) in, 206
inverted-vee dipole for, 205, 206
length of, 204
link-tuned dipole for, 205
longwires for, 209, 210
losses in, 210
quad beam antennas for, 203
random-length longwire antennas
in, 209, 210
transformers for, 210, 211
transmatches in, 208–209, 209
trap dipoles in, 204–206, 204, 205
tunability of, 203
tuned feeder antennas in, 206,
207
tuning of, 205
voltage standing wave ratio
(VSWR) and, 203
Windom antenna as, 209–210, 211
Yagi antennas as, 203
multiband fan dipole, 169–170, 170
multiband top-loaded mobile
antenna, 481, 482
multifilar windings in transformers,
472
multihop communication, 23, 49,
49–50
multihop interference, 36, 36
multiple helical antennas, 428–431,
429, 430
multiple radials from vehiclemounted antenna, 488, 489

N
NAA radio station, 2
National Bureau of Standards (See
National Institute of Standards
and Technology)
national identifiers in call signs, 3
National Institute for Standards
and Technology (NIST), 40, 47
Naval Research Laboratory, 2
near field and far field calculations
in microwave waveguides and
antennas, 395–396
NEC-2 modeling software, 330
NEC4Win95 modeling software, 331
NECWin Basic modeling software,
331–334, 332

1376860_Index_Carr

4/13/01

12:11 PM

Page 599

Index 599
NECWin Plus modeling software,
330–331
Nittany-Scientific, 329, 330, 331
nodes, 87, 129
noise, 37, 68–69
antenna noise temperature as,
417–420
contributors to antenna noise
temperature and, 419–420,
419
environmental/natural noise
(QRN) in, 245
figure of merit and, 418
impedance and, 417–418
Johnson noise in, 417
man-made noise (QRM) in, 245
noise bridge in, 521–522, 521,
522, 523
noise factor (Fn) in, 418
noise figure (NF) in, 418
noise temperature (Te ) in,
418–420
omnidirectionality vs., 245
piezoelectric, 69
RF noise bridge in, 521–522, 521
signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) in,
246
sky noise sources, 419–420
thermal agitation noise, 417
thermal noise in, 417–420
in transmission lines, 68–69
in Yagi antennas, 261
noise bridge, 521–522, 521, 522,
523
noise factor (Fn ), 418
noise figure (NF), 418
noise temperature (Te ), 418–420
nonreciprocal direction propagation, 54
nonresonant antenna adjustment,
524–525
nonresonant loop antennas,
234–235, 234
nonresonant single-wire longwire
antennas, 220–220
nonresonant vee beam longwire
antenna, 223, 224
normalization of impedance, 95–97,
98, 469–470
northern lights, 54
null steering, 229
nulls, in loop antennas, 299–300,
300, 301, 303, 305

Numerical Electromagnetic Computation (NEC) programs, 328

O

1 large loop antennas, 290–293,
290, 291
octagonal loop transmitter antenna,
319, 320, 322, 322, 323, 324
off-center-fed full-wave doublet
(OCFD), 163, 163
off-center-fed nonresonant sloper
(OCFS), 164, 164
ohmic loss, 143–146, 369, 371, 396
ohmic resistance, 19, 27, 140
ohmmeter, coaxial cable test,
437–438, 437
Ohm’s law, transmission lines, 74
-fed grounded vertical antenna,
200–201, 202
ominidirectionality:
in high–frequency dipoles and
doublets, 146
noise vs., 245
in shortwave reception antennas,
272, 273
in vertically polarized HF antennas, 173, 179–181
open line, 59
Orion, 331
orthogonal lobes, in loop antennas,
299–300, 300, 301
OSCAR satellite communications,
3, 339
out–of–phase waves, 22

P
parabolic “dish” antennas, 404–409,
407, 408, 409, 421
beamwidth in, 407
Cassegrain feed in, 408–409, 409
cutoff frequency in, 406
directrix in, 404
effective aperture in, 407
feed geometries for, 408–409,
408, 409
feed illumination in, 406
gain in, 405–408
monopulse feeds, 409, 410
ray tracing showing operation of,
407
splash plates in, 408
x-y coordinates in, 404
parallel lines, 59–63, 60, 65–66

parallel resonant circuits, 526
parallel tuning in loop antennas,
307–309, 308
parasitic elements in Yagi antennas,
258–259
paths, 17–18, 18
Patterson octagonal loop transmitter antenna, 322, 322
pedestals for towers, 568–570, 569
permits, zoning, and regulations,
547–548
phase, 126, 128
phase constant, 82
phase control circuit (PCC), 229
phase reversal stubs, collinear
“Franklin” array antenna in,
165–166, 166
phase shift, 19, 21–23, 129, 409,
412, 413, 450–451, 451
phase velocity (Vp) in microwave
waveguides and antennas, 377,
379, 380
phase-shifting circuit, directional
phased vertical antennas, 252,
252
phase-switching antenna matcher,
shortwave reception antennas,
284, 285
phasing box, shortwave reception
antennas, 284, 286
phasing switch, directional phased
vertical antennas, 249–250, 252
phasing transformer, 249–250, 250,
251
phasing, phased radials, directional
phased vertical antennas,
246–250
pi networks, 461, 461
“picket fencing,” 23
piezoelectricity, 69
planar windings in loop antennas, 303
planetary terminator, 51, 53
plunger or short-circuit termination, microwave waveguides
and antennas, 388, 388
polarity, 126-127, 131, 134
reversal of, 126–127, 131, 134
polarization of radio waves, 12–13,
13, 27, 28, 29, 55, 173
in Beverage antenna, 226–227
in directional phased vertical
antennas (See directional
phased vertical antennas)

1376860_Index_Carr

4/13/01

12:11 PM

Page 600

600 Index
polarization of radio waves (Cont.):
in vertically polarized HF
antennas, 173–202
polarization diversity, 55, 58
power, 11, 21, 140, 515, 531–532
in RF power measurements,
529–539
in vertically polarized HF
antennas, 180
power density, 10
power fading, 36
power gain (Gp ) in microwave
waveguides and antennas,
401–402
power-frequency calibration in,
538, 538
preamplifiers for loop antennas,
304
predictions of propagation, 55, 56
propagation constant (B), 82,
384
propagation modes in microwave
waveguides and antennas,
373–381
propagation of radio waves, 5–58
propagation predictions, 55, 56
pulley system for mounting,
557–558, 558
pure reactance circle, Smith charts,
100, 103
pure resistance line, Smith charts,
95–97, 98

Q
Q–multipliers for loop antennas,
small receiver-type, 313, 315
QRM noise, 245
QRN noise, 245
quad beam VHF/UHF antenna, 356,
358, 359
quad beam antennas, 203
quad loop antennas, 263–267, 264,
266, 267
quality factor (Q), 85, 160,
320–321, 483
quarter-wave matching (Q section)
sections, 85, 146, 199–200, 199,
467–468, 468, 469
quarter-wave vertical polarized HF
antenna, 173
quarter-wavelength longwires, 214,
217
quarter-wavelength lines, 84–85

quarter-wavelength shorted stub
“looking in” impedance in, 372
microwave waveguides and antennas vs., 372–373, 372, 373, 374
transmission lines and, 86, 87, 88
quarter-wavelength vertical
antenna, 181, 182, 183, 187

R
radar, 3, 30, 52
radial-to-mobile-antenna connection
detail, 488, 489
radially scaled parameters, Smith
charts, 106–109, 107
radials:
in grounding and ground systems,
577–579, 579, 580
in impedance matching, 460
in longwires, 215
in low-frequency operation antennas, 502, 502
multiple, from vehicle-mounted
antenna for, 488, 489
radial-to-mobile-antenna connection detail in, 488, 489
in vertically polarized HF antennas, 176, 186, 189, 560–561
radiated fields, 5
radiating vs. nonradiating slots,
microwave waveguides and
antennas, 393
radiation angle, 30, 48–50, 50
radiation loss, 369, 372
radiation patterns:
in Adcock antenna, 449
in beam antennas, 257–258, 258
cardioid, 441, 442
in directional phased vertical
antennas, 246–250, 246, 247
EZNEC for Windows modeling of,
336–337, 337
in high–frequency dipoles and
doublets, 146–152, 147
in isotropic antenna waveguide,
397, 398
in /2 large loop antennas, 287
in longwires, 219, 220, 220–221,
222
in loop antennas, large designs,
299–300, 300, 301
in loop antennas, small receivertype, 299–300, 300, 301, 303,
313

radiation patterns (Cont.):
in loop antennas, small transmittertype, 324, 325
in loopstick antennas, 439, 440,
441
NECWin Basic modeling of, 332,
333, 334
in sense antennas, 441, 442
in switched-pattern RDF antenna,
454–456, 454
in vertically polarized HF antennas, 178–181, 181, 182
in Watson-Watt Adcock array
antennas, 450
in Yagi antennas, 257–258, 258
radiation resistance, 140
in high–frequency dipoles and
doublets, 143–146
in loop antennas, small transmittertype, 319, 321
in microwave waveguides and
antennas, 396
in vertically polarized HF antennas,
183, 184, 185
radiators, high–frequency dipoles
and doublets, 141
radio astronomy antennas, 421–432
directional discontinuity ring
radiator (DDRR) antenna in,
424–427, 426, 427t
helical antennas in, 427–428, 429
interferometer antennas in, 431,
431, 432
Jupiter reception antenna,
421–422, 423
multiple helical antennas in,
428–431, 429, 430
ring antenna, 422–424, 423, 424,
425
summation interferometer array
antenna, 431, 431
radio direction finding (RDF),
439–456
Adcock antennas for, 446–447,
448, 449
AM broadcast band (BCB) in, 439
birdirectionality of loopsticks in,
441
cardioid radiation pattern of sense
antenna in, 441, 442
CONALRAD station frequencies
and, 439
Doppler antennas, 450–451, 451

1376860_Index_Carr

4/13/01

12:11 PM

Page 601

Index 601
radio direction finding (RDF)
(Cont.):
double ducky direction finders
(DDDF) in, 455–456, 455
“fox hunting” antenna in, 444, 445
Global Positioning System (GPS)
and, 443
improvisation of, using portable
AM radio receiver, 443, 443
loop antennas in, small receivertype, 301
loopstick antennas in, 439–440,
440
measurements in, 433
radiation patterns of loopsticks in,
439, 440, 441
regular wire loop antennas for,
444, 445
“rubber ducky” VHF antennas in,
454–456, 455
S meters in, 439
sense antenna for, 441, 442, 446,
447
shortwave and AM BCB “skip” in,
444–446
switched-pattern RDF antenna in,
454–456, 454
time difference of arrival (TDOA)
array antenna in, 452–454,
453
triangulation of radio signal in,
439
Watson-Watt Adcock array antennas in, 447–450, 449, 450
wide-aperture direction finder
(WADF) in, 451
Wullenweber array antennas in,
451, 452
Radio Luxembourg effect, 54
radio system, 515, 516
radio vectoring, 3
radio wave configuration, 5–6
random-length longwires, 209, 210,
213–214, 214, 507–510, 509
ray tracing, 32–33, 407
reactance, 140, 524
(See also capacitive reactance;
inductive reactance)
in high–frequency dipoles and
doublets, 143
Smith charts, 109, 117
Smith charts, capacitive reactance
in, 100, 102

reactance (Cont.):
Smith charts, constant reactance
circles in, 100–105
Smith charts, inductive reactance
in, 100, 101
Smith charts, pure reactance
circle in, 100, 103
in transmission lines, 85–86, 109,
525
in vertically polarized HF antennas,
183, 184
Reber, Grote, 421
receivers, 123
reciprocity, law, 226, 271, 394
recombination phenomena, 18
rectangular waveguide using parallel transmission lines, 370–373,
371
reflected power (Pr), 89, 538, 539
reflected waves, 128, 134
reflection, 16–17, 21, 22, 50, 52,
161
reflection coefficient, 21, 22
Smith charts, 103, 106, 106–109,
112, 114
transmission lines, 71–79, 89, 112,
114
reflection loss, 113–114
reflector antennas, 404, 405, 406
reflectors, Yagi antennas,
258–259
refraction, 16–17, 16, 23–24, 24,
29–30, 30, 48
refractivity of atmosphere, 24–27
regular wire loop antennas, 444,
445
remote tuning, loop antennas, small
receiver-type, 307–309, 310
repeaters for emergency operations
antennas, 487
resistance, 27, 140, 369, 434–437,
523–524
in high–frequency dipoles and
doublets, 143–146, 145
in loop antennas, small transmittertype, 319, 321
in Smith charts, constant or isoresistance circles in, 97–100, 99
in Smith charts, pure resistance
line in, 95–97, 98
in Smith charts, unity resistance
circle in, 100
in transmission lines, 64, 525

resistance (Cont.):
in vertically polarized HF
antennas, 183
resistive vane dummy load in
microwave waveguides and
antennas, 385
resonance, 140, 524
in dipoles, 237
in high–frequency dipoles and
doublets, 143, 149–151, 150
in mobile HF antennas, 483
resonant frequency, 433
resonant vs. non-resonant longwires, 213
return loss, 108–109, 113, 114
RF ammeter, 530, 530
RF noise bridge, 521–522, 521
RF power measurements,
529–539
RF wattmeters, 529–539, 531
rhombic beam longwire antenna,
221, 223–224, 225
rhombic inverted-vee antenna, 169,
169
right-angle flange mounting hardware, 256
ring antenna, 422–424, 423, 424,
425
RLC networks, 59, 143
rotatable dipole antennas, 239,
242, 255–257, 257
rotating joints in microwave waveguides and antennas, 390, 391
“rubber ducky” VHF antennas,
454–456, 455

S
S meters in RDF antennas, 439
safety issues, 543–548
burns or shocks from RF through
vertical antennas, 191, 195
hidden and limited-space
antennas, 233
longwires, 215
microwave waveguides and antennas, 413–415
shortwave reception antennas,
276, 277, 279
VHF/UHF transmitting/receiving
antennas, 340
“salt pipe” to apply chemical soilconductivity improvers,
576–577, 577

1376860_Index_Carr

4/13/01

12:11 PM

Page 602

602 Index
salt to alter soil conductivity,
575–576
satellite communications, 3, 339, 421
scanner band VHF/UHF antennas,
360–368
scanner skyhook VHF/UHF
antennas, 362–368, 363
scanner-vision antennas, 360–362,
361
scatter propagation, 51–54, 53
seasonal variations in radio propagation, 24, 40, 41, 46, 51, 178
selective fading, 55
self-resonant point, loop antennas,
small receiver-type, 317, 317
semipermanent joints in microwave
waveguides and antennas, 389
sense antenna in RDF, 441, 442,
446, 447
series matching section, 468–471
series resonant tuning, loop antennas, small receiver-type,
307–309, 308
series tuned circuits, 526
series-fed vertical antennas, 200
shape constants, loop antennas,
small receiver-type, 303, 303t
shielded loop antennas, 309–311,
311, 312
shielded parallel line, characteristic
impedance of, 66
shielded twin lead, 61, 61
shielding in microwave waveguides
and antennas, 392
shocks hazards from RF through
antennas, 191, 195, 215, 233,
276, 279
short path transmission, 51
short skip, 41
short-circuit termination, in
microwave waveguides and
antennas, 388, 388
shorted lines, 87
shorted stubs, transmission lines,
86, 87
shorted stubs (See stub matching
systems)
shortened coil-loaded dipoles,
157–160, 158
shortened tee antenna, 511, 513
shortwave and shortwave reception
antennas, 2–4, 8, 37, 41, 54–55,
271–286

shortwave and shortwave reception
antennas (Cont.):
angle of radiation in, 274, 274
antenna matching transformer in,
281, 285
antenna matching tuner in, 281,
285
connection to receiver in,
274–276, 275, 276
dipole as, 272, 273, 274
directional wire antenna in,
281–286, 284
directivity of, 272
flattop antennas for, 279, 280
gain in, 272
grounding for, 276, 277, 278–279,
279
interference and, 272, 273, 274
isotropic radiation in, 272
law of reciprocity in, 271
longwire antennas for, 277–278,
278
mounting for, 277–278, 278
multiband wire vertical antennas
for, 281, 282, 283
omnidirectionality in, 272, 273
phase-switching antenna matcher
in, 284, 285
phasing box for, 284, 286
properties of importance in,
271–274
radio direction finding (RDF)
antennas for, 444–446
safety issues in, 276, 277, 279
skip propagation and, 274
transformers in, 281
vertical antennas for, 279–281,
280, 282, 283
shunt feed systems, 200, 507
side scatter, 52
sidelobes in microwave waveguides and antennas, 400, 400,
401
signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), 37, 45,
246
simple refraction, 29
single-sideband (SSB), 55, 495
skin effect, 369, 371
skip distance, 47–48, 48, 47
skip propagation, 5, 29, 37, 41,
47–48, 48, 49, 51, 55
radio direction finding (RDF)
antennas and, 444–446

skip propagation (Cont.):
shortwave reception antennas
and, 274
vertically polarized HF antennas
and, 176–179, 178
VHF/UHF transmitting/receiving
antennas and, 339
skip zone, 47–48, 48
sky noise sources, 419–420
sky wave, 47–48, 48, 49, 302
skyhook VHF/UHF antennas,
362–368, 363
slip-up tower, 567–568, 568, 569
sloping (“sloper” or “slipole”)
dipole, 153–154, 154, 155, 236,
238
half-delta sloper (HDS), 295–296,
296
off-center-fed nonresonant sloper
(OCFS), 164, 164
vee-sloper antenna in, 168–169,
168
slot array antennas, 411–413, 413
Smith charts, 95–121, 96
absorbed power (Pa) in, 113–114
admittance in, 100, 112, 114
angle of reflection coefficient
circle in, 103, 106, 112
angle of transmission coefficient
circle in, 103, 106
applications for, 109–121
capacitive reactance in, 100, 102,
117
complex admittance in, 105
components of, 95–109
constant reactance circles in,
100–105
constant resistance circles in,
97–100, 99
frequency in, 117–121, 119, 120
impedance and impedance matching, 110–112, 111, 115,
119–121, 119
impedance radius in, 100
inductive reactance in, 100, 101,
117
isoresistance circles in, 97–100,
99
loss coefficient scale in, 109,
112–113
lossy circuits and, 117, 118
normalized impedance line in,
95–97, 98

1376860_Index_Carr

4/13/01

12:11 PM

Page 603

Index 603
Smith charts (Cont.):
pure reactance circle in, 100, 103
pure resistance line in, 95–97, 98
radially scaled parameters in,
106–109, 107
reactance in, 109, 117
reflection coefficient in, 106–109,
114
reflection loss in, 113–114
return loss in, 108–109, 113, 114
standing wave ratio (SWR) in, 108
stub matching systems problems
solved using, 109, 114–117,
115, 116
susceptance in, 117
transmission line problems solved
using, 109–114
transmission loss coefficient
(TLC) in, 112, 114
transmission loss in, 108–109
unity resistance circle in, 100
voltage standing wave ratio
(VSWR) circle in, 100, 104,
112, 114, 115, 117
wavelength calculation in, 110,
115
wavelength circles in, 103, 105
Smith, Phillip H., 95
soil conductivity, 27, 28t, 575–577,
576t, 576, 577
solar flares vs. radio propagation,
37, 39, 46–47
solar flux index (SFI), 40
solar storms, 47
solid-state array antennas, 408–411
SOS, 2
southern lights, 54
space diversity, high–frequency
dipoles and doublets, 160
space quadrature fields, 127
space waves, 17–19, 18
spark–gap transmitters, 2
spatial diversity, 55, 57
SPC transmatch network, 463, 463
“spider web” ground system,
vertically polarized HF antennas,
185, 188
splash plates, parabolic “dish”
antennas, 408
split frequencies, loop antennas,
small receiver-type, 302
split-capacitor networks, 461–462,
462

spoiler loop, loop antennas, small
receiver-type, 313, 314
sporadic E propagation, 41, 46
sports fan’s loop antennas, small
receiver-type, 309
spreaders, multiband and tunablewire antennas, 206
square loop (1) large antenna,
290–293, 290
square loop transmitter antenna,
319, 320
stacked dipoles, 160–163, 162
stagger tuning in high–frequency
dipoles and doublets, 157
standard refraction, 25
standing wave antennas, 220
standing wave ratio (SWR), 434
in high–frequency dipoles and
doublets, 144
in Smith charts, 108
in transmission lines, 86–91, 90
standing waves, 87, 127–131, 130,
131
current, 134, 135, 136, 137, 139
in high–frequency dipoles and
doublets, 144
measurement of, 137, 138
in transmission lines, 71, 72, 73
voltage, 134–136, 135, 136, 139
station grounding, 579–580, 581
stationary waves, 128
steady-state ac response, transmission lines, 70, 79–82, 81
steerable notch Beverage antennas,
229, 229
step–function response, transmission lines, 70–71, 70, 71
stirrup-end mounting hardware,
558, 559
storms, ionospheric, 47
strain relief, 553–554, 554
stratosphere, 14, 15, 18
stray capacitance, 138
stripline or microstripline, 63, 64,
66–67
stub matching systems, 114–117,
115, 465–466, 466, 467
impedance matching in, 115
length of stub calculation in,
117
shorted stubs, 114
Smith charts for, 109, 114–117,
115, 116

stub matching systems (Cont.):
in VHF/UHF transmitting/receiving
antennas, 345–346, 345
voltage standing wave ratio
(VSWR) in, 115, 117
wavelength calculation in, 115
subrefraction, 31, 32, 36
sudden ionospheric disturbances
(SIDs), 46–47
summation interferometer array
antenna, 431, 431
sunspots vs. radio propagation,
40–41, 40, 43, 46, 47
superrefraction, 29, 31, 26
support posts, 565, 565
support ropes, 551
suburban lot installation plan, 545
surface waves, 17–19, 18, 27–29
surge impedance (See characteristic impedance)
susceptance, Smith charts, 117
switched-pattern RDF antenna,
454–456, 454
SWR analyzer, 434

T
360-degree directional array, 250,
253, 254t
tapped balun, 476, 477
tee antennas, 511, 512, 513
tee-network transmatch, 463, 463
Teflon, 61, 62
telegraph, 1, 2
telescoping antennas, emergency
operations, 491
television, 3, 32
television interference/broadcast
interference (TVI/BCI), 214
television-scanner VHF/UHF
antennas, 360–362, 361
temperature effect on propagation,
29–32, 32
temporary antenna construction,
emergency operations,
487–488, 488
temporary mast mount for emergency antennas, 492, 493
terminated longwire antennas, 220,
221
terminations for microwave waveguides and antennas, 385–388
terrain effects, 28, 32, 33
thermal agitation noise, 417

1376860_Index_Carr

4/13/01

12:11 PM

Page 604

604 Index
thermal noise, 68, 417–420
thermocouple for RF ammeter, 530,
530
Thorne array antenna, 267–269,
268, 269
three-dimensional (ideal) radiation
pattern, dipoles and doublets,
147–148, 147
tilt angle of surface wave, 28, 28t
tilt angle, rhombic beam longwire,
223
tilted, center-fed, terminated,
folded dipole (TCFTFD or
T2FD, TTFD), 166–168, 167
time difference of arrival (TDOA)
array antenna, 452–454, 453
time domain reflectometry (TDR),
75–79, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81
time quadrature fields, 127
time-of-day variations in radio
propagation, 14, 16, 32, 39–41,
43, 46, 51, 178
top-loaded mobile antenna, 481,
482
toroid broadbanded transformers,
475–477, 476
toroid cores, 471, 472, 474
toroidal transformers, 471–475,
472
towers, 538, 565–572
fold- or tilt-over, 567, 567
gin pole to raise, 570, 571
guy wires and ground stakes for,
570, 572
hinged baseplate, 538, 566–567
impedance matching in, 507, 508
low-frequency operation antennas, loaded tower designs for,
507
masts and supports for, 556–559,
557, 558
pedestals for, 568–570, 569
raising of, 570, 570, 571
safety issues in, 543–548
slip-up, 567–568, 568, 569
transducer action, microwave
waveguides and antennas, 394
transformer loop antennas,
306–307, 306
transformers, 199–200
core material in, 474
current transformer wattmeter in,
534–538, 535, 536, 537

transformers (Cont.):
in directional phased vertical
antennas, 249–250, 250, 251
feeding type, 476, 477
ferrite rods in, 475, 475
in high–frequency dipoles and
doublets, 146
multi-impedance balun and, 476,
477
in multiband and tunable-wire
antennas, 210, 211
multifilar windings in, 472
in shortwave reception antennas,
281
tapped balun and, 476, 477
toroid core mounting in, 471, 472,
474
toroid broadbanded, for impedance matching, 475–477, 476
toroidal type, 471–475, 472
in transformer loop antennas,
306–307, 306
trifilar windings in, 472
turns in, 474
in VHF/UHF transmitting/
receiving antennas, 341–346,
342, 343
windings in, 472–473, 473
transmatch circuits, 208–209, 209,
462–471, 462
transmission lines, 59–94, 516–517
absorbed power (Pa) in, 113–114
adjustments to, 433–438
admittance in, 112, 114
air-articulated line as, 62–63, 63
angle of reflection in, 75
antinodes in, 87
attenuation constant of, 82
balanced transmission line and,
208
cable TV, 67
capacitance in, 64, 69
characteristic impedance (Zo),
64–67, 89
coaxial cable, 59, 61–62, 61, 62,
66, 69, 208
(See also coaxial cable)
conductance in, 64
current standing wave ratio
(ISWR) in, 88
cutoff frequency (Fo ) in, 69
dielectric loss in, 369
double-shielded coaxial as, 63, 63

transmission lines (Cont.):
electrical vs. physical length of,
67–68
equivalent circuit for, 64, 516, 517
gas-filled line as, 62, 63
half-wavelength line as, 83
hardline as, 62, 62
helical line as, 62
impedance and impedance matching, 71, 72, 82–86, 109–112,
111
impedance matching network
(Q section) in, 85
incident power (PI ) in, 89
inductance in, 64
installation tips for, 433–438
insulators in, 61
load impedance in, 109–110
longwires and, 217–218
“looking-in” impedance of, 82–86
loss coefficient scale in, 112–113
loss in, 83–84, 91–94, 369
measurement and adjustment
techniques for, 516–517, 525
mismatch (VSWR) losses in,
91–94
multiband and tunable-wire
antennas and, feeding,
208–212
nodes in, 87
noise and, 68–69
ohmic loss in, 369
Ohm’s law and, 74
open line as, 59
parallel lines as, 59–63, 60, 65–66
phase constant of, 82
propagation constant of, 82
Q section in, 85
quarter-wavelength lines as, 84–85
quarter-wavelength shorted stubs
in, 86, 87, 88
radiation loss in, 369
reactance in, 85–86, 109, 525
rectangular waveguide using
parallel type, 370–373, 371
reflected power (Pr ) in, 89
reflection coefficient in, 71–79, 89,
112, 114
reflection loss in, 113–114
resistance in, 64, 525
responses in, 70–94
return loss in, 113, 114
RLC networks and, 59

1376860_Index_Carr

4/13/01

12:11 PM

Page 605

Index 605
transmission lines (Cont.):
shielded parallel line as, 66
shielded twin lead as, 61, 61
shorted lines and, 87
shorted stubs, 86, 87, 114
(See also stub matching systems)
skin effect in, 369
Smith charts for, 109–114
standing wave ratio (SWR) in,
86–91, 90
standing waves in, 71, 72, 73, 87
steady-state ac response in, 70,
79–82, 81
step–function response in, 70–71,
70, 71
stripline or microstripline as, 63,
64, 66–67
stub matching systems (See stub
matching systems)
surge impedance (Zo) in, 516
time domain reflectometry (TDR)
measurements in, 75–79, 76,
77, 78, 79, 80, 81
transmission loss coefficient
(TLC) in, 112, 114
troubleshooting tips for,
433–438
twin lead as, 59, 60
velocity factor of, 67–68, 68t, 525
voltage minima and maxima in, 87
voltage standing wave ratio
(VSWR) in, 88–94, 90, 112,
114, 517, 518
waveguides vs., 86
wavelength calculation in, 110
transmission loss, using Smith
charts, 108–109
transmission loss coefficient (TLC),
112, 114
transmitters, 123
transmitting antennas, small loops
(See loop antennas, small
transmitter-type)
transverse electric mode (TE
mode) in microwave waveguides and antennas, 375
transverse electromagnetic (TEM)
fields, 9, 69, 373–375
transverse magnetic mode (TM
mode) in microwave waveguides and antennas, 375
trap dipoles, 204–206, 204, 205
traveling wave antennas, 220, 223

traveling waves, 127, 128–129, 129,
134
trenching to apply chemical soilconductivity improvers, 576,
576
triangle loop (1) large antenna,
290–293, 291
triangulation of radio signal, 302,
439
trifilar windings in transformers, 472
tropical band, Beverage or “wave”
antenna in, 224–228, 226, 228,
229
troposphere, 14, 15, 29, 51
tropospheric propagation, 17–19,
18, 29–32
troubleshooting tips, 433–438
true longwire antenna, 217–219,
217
tubing construction of vertical
dipole,192–194, 193
tunability, multiband and tunablewire antennas, 203
tunable dipoles, 160
tunable-wire antennas, 203–212
tuned circuit measurements, 526
tuned feeder antennas, 206, 207
tuning, 524
antenna matching tuner in, 281,
285
of ground wires, 580–581
of high–frequency dipoles and
doublets, 149–152
of longwires, 214, 215, 215
of loop antennas, small receivertype, 304, 307–309, 308,
312–313
of marine radio antennas,
497–500, 499, 500
of mobile HF antennas, 483–485
of multiband and tunable-wire
antennas, 203–205
of shortwave reception antennas,
281
tuning antennas, 203
tuning capacitance and capacitors,
loop antennas, small transmittertype, 320–321
turns in transformers, 474
TV receive-only (TVRO) satellite
dishes, 421
twenty–seven day cycle of radio
propagation, 46

twin lead, 59, 60
two-meter Yagi VHF/UHF antenna,
352–353, 352
two-port phasing transformer for
directional phased vertical
antennas, 249–250, 250, 251

U
U-bolt mounting hardware, 558,
559
ultrahigh frequency (UHF), 13,
17–19, 23, 29, 32, 39, 61
in loop antennas, small receivertype, 302
in VHF/UHF transmitting/
receiving antennas, 339–368
ultraviolet (UV) radiation, 9, 39
umbra region, 17
unity resistance circle, Smith
charts, 100
Universal Coordinated Time (UTC),
55
upper sideband (USB), 55

V
varactor tuning, in loop antennas,
small receiver-type, 309, 310
variation, ionospheric, 45–47
vee beam longwire antennas,
221–223, 222
vee dipole, 236, 239
vee-sloper antenna, 168–169, 168
velocity factor (VF ), 14, 525
of coax, 248
of microwave waveguides and
antennas, 377–381, 378
of transmission lines, 67–68, 68t
velocity of propagation, 8, 13–14,
137–139, 139
vertical antennas (See vertically
polarized HF antennas)
vertical coax VHF/UHF antenna,
346–349, 347, 348
vertical dipole scanner antenna,
364, 364, 365
vertical extent radiation pattern,
vertically polarized HF antennas, 179, 180
vertical plane radiation pattern,
high–frequency dipoles and
doublets, 148–149, 148
vertical polarization, 12–13, 13, 27,
28, 55, 173

1376860_Index_Carr

4/13/01

12:11 PM

Page 606

606 Index
vertical polarization (Cont.):
Beverage antenna, 226–227
helically wound antennas, 239,
242, 243
vertically polarized HF antennas,
173–202
vertically polarized HF antennas,
173–202, 174
above-ground mounted, 197
angle of radiation in, 176–179, 178
antenna tuning units (ATU) in, 173
coaxial vertical antennas in,
191–194, 192, 193
coaxial vertical scanner antenna
in, 365–368, 367, 368
coaxial-fed, 175
collinear vertical VHF/UHF
antenna, 349, 350
collinear vertical antennas in,
191–194, 192
construction of, 195–197
current in, 173, 174
delta-fed grounded vertical
antenna in, 200–201, 200
directionally phased (See
directional phased vertical
antennas)
“drooping radials” in, 176, 177
electric fields in, 173
electrical connections for,197,
198, 560–561
feedpoint circuits for, 197, 198
fence posts as supports for vertical antennas, 561–565, 563,
564
five-eighths-wavelength antenna,
181, 182, 183, 197–200
four/4x4 support posts for, 565,
565
gain in, 179–181
gamma-fed grounded vertical
antenna in, 200–201, 201
ghost radiator in, 173
ground losses in, 183
ground plane vertical antennas in,
176, 177
ground-mounted, 176, 195–197,
196, 561–565, 562
grounding and ground system for,
176, 185–187, 188, 195–197,
196, 200–201
half-slope vertical antenna, 238,
240

vertically polarized HF antennas
(Cont.):
half-wave vertical dipole in,
187–191, 190
half-wavelength antenna, 181, 182
height of antenna in, 181, 187
helically wound antennas, 239,
242, 243
image antenna in, 173
impedance and impedance matching, 173, 175–176, 183,
184, 186, 195–197, 199–200,
199
installation of, 560–572
insulators in, 175, 195
isotropic radiation in, 179–181,
181
J-pole antennas in, 201
length of, 181, 183, 184
limited-space designs, 238, 240
losses in, 183
low-frequency operation antennas,
502–505, 503
mast-mounted, 175, 194–195,
194, 546, 560–561, 561, 562
mounting, 186, 189–190, 194–197,
194, 196, 560–565, 561
non-ground-mounted, 195, 197
non-quarter-wavelength verticals
in, 181–185
omega-fed grounded vertical
antenna in, 200–201, 202
omnidirectionality in, 173,
179–181
power calculation in, 180
Q-sections in, 199–200, 199
quarter-wavelength antenna, 173,
181, 182, 183, 187
radials used in, 176, 186, 189,
560–561
radiation patterns in, 178–181,
181, 182
radiation resistance in, 183, 184,
185
reactance in, 183, 184
resistance in, 183
safety issues, burns or shocks
from RF through vertical
antennas, 191, 195
series-fed vertical antennas in,
200
shortwave reception antennas,
279–281, 280, 282, 283

vertically polarized HF antennas
(Cont.):
shunt-fed vertical antennas in, 200
skip propagation and, 176–179,
178
“spider web” ground system for,
185, 188
tower installation, 538, 565–572
transformers in, 199–200
tubing construction of vertical
dipole,192–194, 193
vertical coax VHF/UHF antenna,
346–349, 347, 348
vertical dipole scanner antenna in,
364, 364, 365
vertical extent radiation pattern
in, 179, 180
VHF/UHF transmitting/receiving
antennas, 340–341
voltage in, 173, 174
voltage standing wave ratio
(VSWR) in, 176, 195
window-sill antennas, 238, 241
Yagi antennas and, 201
very high frequency (VHF), 13,
17–19, 23, 29, 30, 32, 39, 41, 46,
54, 55, 170–171
emergency operations antennas
and, 487
loop antennas, small receiver-type
and, 302
marine radio antennas and, 495
vertically polarized HF antennas
and, 191
VHF/UHF transmitting/receiving
antennas and, 339–368
very low frequency (VLF), 29, 55,
61
Beverage or “wave” antenna in,
224–228, 226, 228, 229
VHF/UHF transmitting/receiving
antennas, 339–368
baluns in, 341–346, 342, 343
bandwidth of, 339
beam antennas in, 349–352, 351,
352
“bowtie” dipoles in, 361, 362
citizens’ band antennas as, 341
coaxial vertical antenna for,
346–349, 347, 348
coaxial vertical scanner antenna
in, 365–368, 367, 368
collinear vertical antenna, 349, 350

1376860_Index_Carr

4/13/01

12:11 PM

Page 607

Index 607
VHF/UHF transmitting/receiving
antennas (Cont.):
delta feed match for, 343, 344, 345
design limitations in, 340
directivity in, 349
drooping dipole scanner antenna
in, 363, 363
effective radiated power (ERP) in,
349
five-eighths-wavelength 2-meter
antenna for, 353, 354
folded dipoles in, 362, 362
frequency spectrum of, 339, 341
gain in, 349
gamma match system for, 346,
346
groundplane antenna for, 356, 357
groundplane scanner antenna in,
364, 366
halo antenna for, 356, 358
impedance matching in, 341–346,
342
J-pole antenna for, 353–355, 355
length of, 339
line-of-sight communications and,
339
longwires as, 340–341
low frequency (LF) vs., 339
lower band antennas on VHF/UHF,
340–341
mounting, 347
OSCAR satellite communications
and, 339
quad beam antenna for, 356, 358,
359
safety issues in, 340
satellite communications and, 339
scanner band antennas, 360–368
scanner skyhook antennas in,
362–368, 363
scanner-vision antennas in,
360–362, 361
size of, as limiting factor, 340
skip propagation in, 339
stub matching system for,
345–346, 345
transformers in, 341–346, 342,
343
two-meter Yagi antenna, 352–353,
352
vertical antennas as, 340–341
vertical dipole scanner antenna in,
364, 364, 365

VHF/UHF transmitting/receiving
antennas (Cont.):
voltage standing wave ratio
(VSWR) in, 341
wavelength in, 339
Yagi antennas in, 349–352, 351, 352
virtual height, 43, 44, 45
voltage, 123–120, 131–137, 132,
133, 531
(See also voltage standing wave
ratio)
in high–frequency dipoles and
doublets, 143–146, 143
lag, 126
in loop antennas, small receivertype, 303, 304
in loop antennas, small transmittertype, 320, 323
minima and maxima of (See antinodes; nodes)
standing waves of, 134–136, 135,
136, 139
in vertically polarized HF antennas in, 173, 174
voltage standing wave ratio
(VSWR), 88–91, 90, 515,
517–519, 529, 532
calculation of, 517–519
EZNEC for Windows modeling of,
337, 338
frequency vs., 434–437, 435
in hidden and limited-space
antennas, 238
in high–frequency dipoles and
doublets in, 144, 146, 149–151,
150, 160
in longwires, 215
in loop antennas, small transmittertype, 320
measurement of, 433, 435–437,
436, 529, 532
in microwave waveguides and
antennas, 388
in mobile HF antennas, 483
in multiband and tunable-wire
antennas, 203
NECWin Basic modeling of, 333,
335
using Smith charts circle, 100,
104, 112, 114, 115, 117
in stub matching systems, 115, 117
in transmission lines, 91–94, 112,
114, 517, 518

voltage (Cont.):
in vertically polarized HF
antennas, 195
in VHF/UHF transmitting/receiving
antennas, 341
in Yagi antennas, 261

W
water analogy of radio wave propagation, 6–7
Watson-Watt Adcock array antennas, 447–450, 449, 450
wattmeters, 529–539, 531, 533,
534, 535, 536, 537, 538
waveguides, 86, 369–415
(See also microwave waveguides
and antennas)
wavelength calculation, using Smith
charts, 103, 105, 110, 115
wavelength, 7–8, 28
high–frequency dipoles and
doublets, 141–142
longwires, 217, 218–219
microwave waveguides and
antennas, 377–381, 378
VHF/UHF transmitting/receiving
antennas, 339
“wave” antenna, 224–228, 226,
228, 229
weather–related propagation
phenomena, 28, 36
wedge dummy loads, in microwave
waveguides and antennas, 385,
386, 387
Wheatstone bridge, 519–521,
520
whip antennas for marine radio,
496–497, 497
wide-aperture direction finder
(WADF), 451
windings in transformers, 472–473,
473
Windom antenna, 209–210,
211
Windom, Loren, 209
window-sill antennas, 238, 241
wire antenna, basic design, 548,
548
wire used in longwires, 214
wireless telegraphy, 1–2
Wolf Number, 40
World Administrative Radio
Conferences (WARC), 2

1376860_Index_Carr

4/13/01

12:11 PM

Page 608

608 Index
Wullenweber array antennas, 451,
452
WWV radio station, 40, 47
WWVH radio station, 40

X
X bands, 69
x-ray radiation, 39

Y
Yagi antennas, 203, 257–262, 259,
421
capacitors in, 261
directors in, 258–259
feedpoints, 260–261, 261

Yagi antennas (Cont.):
gamma match feed system for,
260–261, 261
impedance matching in, 260–261,
261
length of, 259–260
noise and VSWR in, 261
parasitic elements in, 258–259
quad beam antennas vs., 265
radiation pattern of, 257–258, 258
reflectors in, 258–259
two-meter Yagi VHF/UHF antenna,
352–353, 352
vertically polarized HF antennas,
201

Yagi antennas (Cont.):
VHF/UHF transmitting/receiving
antennas, 349–352, 351,
352
Yagi-Uda antenna, 258

Z
Zepp antenna, 164–165, 165,
171
end-fed multiband, 208, 208
zipcord, 275
ZL-special beam antenna, 20-m,
262–263, 262
Zurich Smoothed Sunspot
Number, 40

1376860_Index_Carr

4/13/01

12:11 PM

Page 609

About the Author
Joe Carr was a military electronics technician and author. Along with the best-selling
Practical Antenna Handbook, his other books with McGraw-Hill include Secrets of
RF Circuit Design. Carr also contributed a monthly column to Nuts & Volts magazine entitled “Open Channel.”

609

This page intentionally left blank

This page intentionally left blank

1376860_Index_Carr

4/13/01

12:11 PM

Page 612

SOFTWARE AND INFORMATION LICENSE
The software and information on this diskette (collectively referred to as the “Product”) are the property of The
McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. (“McGraw-Hill”) and are protected by both United States copyright law and international copyright treaty provision. You must treat this Product just like a book, except that you may copy it into a computer to be used and you may make archival copies of the Products for the sole purpose of backing up our software
and protecting your investment from loss.
By saying “just like a book,” McGraw-Hill means, for example, that the Product may be used by any number of people and may be freely moved from one computer location to another, so long as there is no possibility of the Product
(or any part of the Product) being used at one location or on one computer while it is being used at another. Just as
a book cannot be read by two different people in two different places at the same time, neither can the Product be
used by two different people in two different places at the same time (unless, of course, McGraw-Hill’s rights are
being violated).
McGraw-Hill reserves the right to alter or modify the contents of the Product at any time.
This agreement is effective until terminated. The Agreement will terminate automatically without notice if you fail
to comply with any provisions of this Agreement. In the event of termination by reason of your breach, you will
destroy or erase all copies of the Product installed on any computer system or made for backup purposes and shall
expunge the Product from your data storage facilities.

LIMITED WARRANTY
McGraw-Hill warrants the physical diskette(s) enclosed herein to be free of defects in materials and workmanship
for a period of sixty days from the purchase date. If McGraw-Hill receives written notification within the warranty
period of defects in materials or workmanship, and such notification is determined by McGraw-Hill to be correct,
McGraw-Hill will replace the defective diskette(s). Send request to:
Customer Service
McGraw-Hill
Gahanna Industrial Park
860 Taylor Station Road
Blacklick, OH 43004-9615
The entire and exclusive liability and remedy for breach of this Limited Warranty shall be limited to replacement of
defective diskette(s) and shall not include or extend to any claim for or right to cover any other damages, including
but not limited to, loss of profit, data, or use of the software, or special, incidental, or consequential damages or other
similar claims, even if McGraw-Hill has been specifically advised as to the possibility of such damages. In no event will
McGraw-Hill’s liability for any damages to you or any other person ever exceed the lower of suggested list price or
actual price paid for the license to use the Product, regardless of any form of the claim.
THE McGRAW-HILL COMPANIES, INC. SPECIFICALLY DISCLAIMS ALL OTHER WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO, ANY IMPLIED WARRANTY OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS
FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. Specifically, McGraw-Hill makes no representation or warranty that the Product is
fit for any particular purpose and any implied warranty of merchantability is limited to the sixty day duration of the
Limited Warranty covering the physical diskette(s) only (and not the software or in-formation) and is otherwise
expressly and specifically disclaimed.
This Limited Warranty gives you specific legal rights; you may have others which may vary from state to state.
Some states do not allow the exclusion of incidental or consequential damages, or the limitation on how long an implied warranty lasts, so some of the above may not apply to you.
This Agreement constitutes the entire agreement between the parties relating to use of the Product. The terms of
any purchase order shall have no effect on the terms of this Agreement. Failure of McGraw-Hill to insist at any time
on strict compliance with this Agreement shall not constitute a waiver of any rights under this Agreement. This
Agreement shall be construed and governed in accordance with the laws of New York. If any provision of this Agreement is held to be contrary to law, that provision will be enforced to the maximum extent permissible and the
remaining provisions will remain in force and effect.

