Amateur radio syllabus - Full level

Amateur radio syllabus - Full level V1.5

1 September 2022

Full Licence Syllabus v 1.5
Section 1 — Licensing conditions and station identification
Nature of amateur radio, types of licence and call signs
1A2

Identify the types of UK licence and the format of all call signs in use including
regional secondary locators, and all suffixes.
Note: The club, special event and contest call signs are not examined in this
section.

1A5

Recall the requirements for station identification.
Note: For the purposes of the examination this includes identifying when there
is a change of:
•
•
•
•
•

frequency;
mode;
operator unless under supervision;
supervisor;
Regional Secondary Locator.

Operators and supervision
1B1

Understand the requirements when delegating supervisory responsibilities and
the permitted uses and conditions.

1B2

Understand the meaning and identification of a Disqualified Person and the
meaning of ‘reasonable grounds to believe is not a Disqualified Person’.
Understand the meaning of Radio Amateurs pass certificate.
Understand the meaning of a recognised training course.
Understand the duties of a supervisor during use by non-UK licensed persons.
Understand the procedure for sending messages by non-licensed persons
(greetings messages).
Messages

1C1

Understand the requirements relating to the content of messages and who
messages may be sent to.
Understand the circumstances when messages, including encrypted content,
may be sent.
Understand the distinction between the use of codes and abbreviations and
encryption.
Understand that people of all ages and backgrounds participate in amateur
radio and that messages must not cause offence, particularly in the context of
relevant legislation including the Wireless Telegraphy (Content of
Transmission) Regulations 1988 and the Communications Act (2003).

1C2

Understand the Licence requirements in respect of the receipt of messages
from amateurs on non-UK frequencies.
Understand the Licence requirements in respect of recorded and re-transmitted
messages.

Apparatus, inspection and closedown
1D1

Understand the requirements for clean and stable transmitters and the need to
control transmitted bandwidth.
Understand the need to avoid Undue Interference to other wireless telegraphy.
Understand the need to conduct tests from time to time to ensure that the
station is not causing Undue Interference to other radio users.
Understand the need to have equipment for the reception of messages on all
frequencies and modes in use for transmissions.
Understand the role of Ofcom in cases of Undue Interference.
Unattended and remote control operation

1E2

Recall that the Licensee may use any communication link for the purposes of
Remote Control of the main station.
Recall that if the Remote Control link is in an amateur band that the licence
requirements for the link are the same as the requirements for the main station.
Recall that a link in an amateur band should be above 30MHz.
Recall that a link in an amateur band must not be encrypted.
CEPT and international

1F1

Understand the requirements for operation by individual UK Licensees abroad
under the CEPT Recommendation T/R 61-01 and T/R 61-02.
Understand this facility does not extend to club or reciprocal licences.
Understand the purpose and function of the CEPT Harmonised Amateur Radio
Examination Certificate (HAREC).
Recall that many countries will offer reciprocal licences to UK amateurs with a
HAREC Full licence and that operation is in accordance with the host country’s
rules.

1F2

Understand the requirements for operation whilst Maritime Mobile and meaning
of Maritime Mobile and Vessel at Sea.
Understand the requirements of permission to install and operate, Radio
Silence and Log Keeping.
Identify the 3 ITU regions and recall that the frequencies are given in the ITU
Radio Regulations.
Licence schedule

1G1

Identify relevant information in Schedules 1 and 2 to the Full licence.
A copy of the relevant part of Schedules 1 and 2 will be available during the
examination.

1G2

Understand relevant information in Schedule 3 to the licence.
• Origin of the EMF restrictions (ICNIRP);
• Meaning of the term ‘general public’;
• Areas in which the general public need to be protected from EMF in
breach of the limits.
• Records of EMF assessment;
• Procedure for carrying out an EMF assessment;
• Emergency situations.
Section 2 — Technical aspects
Fundamental theory

2A1

Understand component tolerances and the effects they may have in circuit
operation.
Power

2B1

Solve series/parallel resistor circuits to calculate currents, voltages, resistances
and power given appropriate values. This may include the use of series/parallel
formulae, Ohm’s Law and power.
Equations include P=V²/R and P=I²×R
Reactive components

2D1

Understand the factors influencing the capacitance of a capacitor; area and
separation of the plates, permittivity of dielectrics and formula C=k×A/d.
Recall that the Coulomb is the quantity of electricity, Q, given by current × time
and that the charge on a capacitor is given by Q = V×C.

2D2

Recall that different dielectrics are used for different purposes, e.g. air,
ceramic, mica and polyester; and that with some dielectrics, losses increase
with increasing frequency.

2D3

Understand that capacitors have a breakdown voltage and that they need to be
used within that voltage.

2D4

Understand the term ‘self-inductance’ and recall that a ‘back EMF’ is produced
as current flow changes in an inductor.

2D7

Understand the rise and fall of current in an LR circuit and that the time
constant τ = L/R.
Understand the rise and fall of voltage in a CR circuit and that the time
constant τ = C×R.

AC theory
2E3

Understand that current lags potential difference by 90° in an inductor and that
current leads by 90° in a capacitor.
Understand the formulae for the reactance of a capacitor or inductor in terms of
the frequency and component value.
Calculate the unknown term given the other two.

2E4

Understand the use of capacitors for AC coupling (DC blocking) and
decoupling AC signals (including RF bypass) to ground.

2E5

Understand the use of inductors for DC decoupling (AC blocking).

2E6

Understand that impedance is a combination of resistance and reactance and
apply the formula for impedance and current in a series CR or LR circuit.
Digital signals

2F1

Understand that analogue to digital conversion can generate a false image of
the signal if frequencies are present above the frequency which is half the
sampling (Nyquist) rate.
Recall that these false images are known as aliases.
Understand that anti-aliasing filters are used to avoid this occurring.

2F2

Recall that digital signals in the time domain can be depicted in the frequency
domain by using a mathematical operation known as a Fourier Transform (FT).
Recall that a Fourier Transform takes digital signals in the time domain and
calculates the amplitudes and the frequencies which comprised the original
signal.
Transformers

2G1

Understand the concept of mutual inductance.
Understand and apply the formulae relating transformer primary and secondary
turns to primary and secondary potential differences and currents.
Understand the impedance change in a transformer and apply the formula
relating transformer primary and secondary terms to primary and secondary
impedances.
Recall that different magnetic materials used as cores for inductors and
transformers perform best over different frequency ranges and affect their
efficiency.
Recall that losses in the material will cause heating which affects power
handling and the required physical size of the core for the power concerned.
Tuned Circuits and resonance

2H1

Apply the formula for the resonant frequency of a tuned circuit to find values of
f, L or C from given data.

2H2

Recall the equivalent circuit of a crystal and that it exhibits series and parallel
resonance.
Recall that crystals are manufactured for either series or parallel operation and
will only be stable and correct on the marked frequency when used in the
intended manner.

2H4

Understand the concept of the magnification factor Q as applied to the voltages
and currents in a resonant circuit.
Recall that voltages and circulating currents in tuned circuits can be very high
and understand the implications for component rating.
Apply the formula for Q factor given circuit component values.
Recall the definition of the half power point of resonance curves.
Apply the equation for Q given the resonant frequency and the half power
points on the resonance curve.

2H5

Understand the meaning of dynamic resistance, RD.
Semiconductor devices

2I1

Recall that a Zener diode will conduct when the applied reverse bias potential
is above its designed value and identify its V/I characteristic curve.

2I3

Understand the basics of biasing NPN and PNP bipolar transistors and field
effect transistors (FET) (including dual gate devices).
Note: Circuits shown will be an NPN transistor connected in common
emitter/common source mode.

2I4

Identify different types of small signal amplifiers (e.g. common emitter (source),
emitter follower and common base) and explain their operation in terms of input
and output impedances, current gain, voltage gain and phase change.
Recall the characteristics and typical circuit diagrams of different classes of
amplifiers (i.e. A, B, A/B and C).

2I5

Understand the feedback requirements to sustain oscillations in an oscillator.
Cells and power supplies

2J2

Understand the function of stabilising circuits and identify different types of
stabilising circuits (i.e. Zener diode/pass transistor and IC).
Note: questions on the characteristics of individual components are covered in
other parts of this syllabus. This subsection is on complete circuits.

2J3

Understand the need for rectifier diodes to have a sufficient peak inverse
voltage (PIV) rating and calculate the PIV in diode/capacitor circuits.

2J4

Understand the basic principles and operation of a switch mode power supply,
at block diagram level.

Section 3 — Transmitters and receivers
Transmitter concepts
3A2

Recall the meaning of Modulation Index and its effect on the number of FM
sidebands.
Transmitter architecture

3B1

Understand the block diagram of an SSB transmitter employing mixers to
generate the final frequency.
Understand the block diagram of an FM transmitter employing either frequency
multipliers or mixers to generate the final frequency.
Oscillators

3C1

Recall the effect and the importance of minimising drift.

3C3

Recall the block diagram of a Phase Locked Loop (PLL) frequency synthesiser
and the functions of the stages i.e. oscillator, fixed divider, phase detector, Low
Pass Filter (LPF), voltage controlled oscillator and programmable divider.
Recall how sinusoidal waves may be produced by direct digital synthesis and
the block diagram of a simple synthesiser.
Recall that increasing the number of bits in the synthesiser will increase the
purity of the signal. Recall the function of the Clock, Lookup Table, DAC and
LPF in a DDS block diagram.
Frequency multipliers

3D1

Understand that frequency multipliers use harmonics to generate frequencies
above an oscillator’s fundamental frequency (e.g. in a microwave transmitter).
Microphone amplifiers and modulators

3E1

Understand the operation of AM, SSB and FM modulators.
Calculate the bandwidth of such transmissions.

3E2

Identify typical sideband filter circuits and calculate relevant frequencies.
RF power amplifiers

3F2

Understand the need for linear amplification and identify which forms of
modulation require a linear amplifier.
Identify simple RF transmitter PA circuits.
Understand the meaning of linearity as applied to a circuit or amplifier.
Understand how distortion of a single frequency signal can produce harmonics
of that frequency.
Understand how distortion of two (or more) frequencies can produce harmonics
and intermodulation products of the input frequencies.

3F3

Recall the function of the main components of a PA circuit, i.e. collector load,
bias, input circuit, output filter and matching.

3F4

Understand the implications for PA rating of different types of modulation and
the effects of speech processing, with particular regard to peak to average
power ratios.

3F5

Recall the function of automatic level control within the power amplifier circuit
and when using an external power amplifier. Recall the function and use of a
manual RF power control.
Transmitter interference

3G1

Understand that over-modulation distorts the modulating signal resulting in
harmonics of the audio which causes excessive transmitted bandwidth.

3G2

Understand that over-drive of the RF power amplifier can also result in
excessive transmitted bandwidth.
Understand the need to drive external power amplifiers with the minimum
power required for full output and how overdriving may cause harmonics and/or
spurious intermodulation products.

3G3

Understand ways to avoid generating harmonics e.g. use of push-pull
amplifiers and avoiding high drive levels.
Recall that transmitters may radiate unwanted mixer products and identify
suitable remedies.
Understand the use of low pass, band pass and band stop (notch) filters in
minimising the radiation of unwanted harmonics and mixer products.

3G4

Recall that unwanted emissions may be caused by parasitic oscillation and/or
self-oscillation and identify suitable remedies.

3G5

Understand how frequency synthesisers may not produce the intended
frequency.
Identify appropriate measures to prevent off-frequency transmissions.
Receiver concepts

3H3

Understand that overloading a receiver causes intermodulation products and
that those close to or within the wanted signal bandwidth limit the ability of the
receiver to detect weak signals.
Recall that the dynamic range of a receiver is the difference between the
minimum discernible signal and the maximum signal without overload.
Recall that dynamic range is expressed in decibels.
Superheterodyne concepts

3I1

Understand the block diagram of superheterodyne and double
superheterodyne receivers and the functions of each block.

3I2

Understand the function of a mixer, the generation of the Intermediate
Frequency (IF) and other mixer products.

3I3

Understand the advantages and disadvantages of high and low intermediate
frequencies and the rationale for the double and triple superhet.
Understand that for given RF and IF frequencies, there is a choice of two
possible local oscillator (LO) frequencies.
Understand the reasons for the choice and calculate the frequencies.
Understand the origin of the image frequency and calculate the frequency from
given parameters.

3I4

Understand the operation of an IF amplifier and the IF transformer.
Understand the concept of two LC tuned circuits utilising transformer coupling.
Identify critical and over-coupled response curves.
Understand how the gain of an IF amplifier can be varied, how this may cause
distortion and how the effects of the distortion are avoided.

3I5

Recall the source and effects of phase noise.
Recall the unit of measurement is dBc/Hz.
RF amplifiers and external pre-amplifiers

3J1

Recall the operation of the RF amplifier.
Understand that external RF preamplifiers do not always improve overall
performance and will reduce the dynamic range.
Understand why, at HF, this loss can be as much as the gain of the preamp but
that at VHF and above a low noise pre-amp is beneficial.
Understand why most benefit is gained by locating the pre-amp at the antenna.
Demodulation

3K1

Understand the operation of basic analogue AM, CW, SSB and FM
demodulator circuits and the function of the limiter for FM.
Automatic gain control (AGC)

3L1

Understand the source and use of an AGC voltage.
Recall that the speed of the AGC response can be adjusted on both attack and
decay.
SDR transmitters and receivers

3M1

Recall that analogue and digital signals are transmitted by some form of
amplitude and/or frequency/phase modulation.
Recall that amplitude and frequency/phase modulation can be portrayed on a
phasor diagram.
Understand that to fully capture the information contained in the amplitude and
phase of the signal that the position of the phasors must be resolved as the
values on two axes at right angles.

3M2

Recall that mixing the RF or IF signal with two local oscillator signals 90
degrees different in phase will produce an in-phase (I) and quadrature (Q)
component which can be digitised allowing all forms of modulation to be
demodulated entirely by mathematical processes in a PC or using dedicated
hardware.
Recall that this technique is the basis of SDR (software defined radio)
receivers.
Recall that these techniques can also be used to create complex modulations
for use in transmitters.
Recall that if sampling is carried out directly on the RF signal the extraction of I
and Q components and subsequent demodulation may be carried out entirely
by mathematical processes.
Transceivers

3N1

Understand that transceivers normally share oscillators between the transmitter
and receiver circuits; and they may use common IF filters to limit both the
transmitter and receiver bandwidths and that they also use common
changeover circuits.
Recall the function and use of the RIT control.

3N2

Understand that using a transverter enables operation on frequency bands not
covered by the primary transceiver equipment.
Calculate appropriate frequencies used in transverter operation.
Recall that transverters generally require low power drive.
Understand the need for extra care to avoid transmitting out of band when
using a transverter.
Recall that transverters require the correct interfacing with the primary
equipment to control sequencing and prevent hot switching.
Understand the techniques of RF sensing and PTT (push-to-talk) transmit
receive switching.
Section 4 – Feeders and antennas
Feeders

4A3

Understand that the velocity factor of a feeder is the ratio of the velocity of
radio waves in the feeder to that in free space and that the velocity factor is
always less than unity.
Recall that the velocity factor for coaxial feeder with a solid polythene dielectric
is approximately 0.67 or 2/3.
Perform calculations involving velocity factor, physical length, electrical length
and frequency.
Baluns

4B1

Recall the construction and use of transformer, sleeve and choke type baluns.
Identify the circuits of 1:1 and 4:1 transformer baluns.

Types of antenna
4D1

Recall the equation for calculating wavelengths and apply an end factor
correction when calculating the approximate physical lengths of simple dipoles
and end fed antennas.

4D2

Recall the current and voltage distribution on the centre fed dipole and /4
ground plane antennas.
Recall the feed point impedances of centre fed half-wave dipoles, quarter-wave
and loaded 5/8  verticals, folded dipoles, full-wave loops and end feed /4
and /2 antennas.
Recall the effect of passive antenna elements on feed point impedance and the
use of folded dipoles in Yagi antennas.
Standing waves

4E1

Understand that the standing wave ratio (SWR) is a measure of the signal
travelling back down the feeder expressed in terms of the standing waves
caused by the reflected signal voltage (or current).

4E2

Recall that return loss is the ratio of the forward signal power to the return
signal power; normally expressed in dB.
Understand that a low SWR equates to a high return loss and a high SWR
equates to a low return loss.

4E3

Understand that the loss in the feeder will reduce the SWR and increase the
return loss as measured at the transmitter and that the SWR at the antenna is
unaffected.
Recall that Return Loss at transmitter = Return Loss at antenna + 2x (feeder
loss).
Antenna matching units

4F1

Understand that Antenna Matching Units (AMUs) can cancel reactive
components of the antenna system feed point impedance (before or after the
feeder) and can transform impedances to an acceptable resistive value.
Identify typical AMU circuits i.e. T, Pi and L circuits.

4F2

Understand that a quarter-wave length of feeder can be used as an impedance
2

transformer. Apply simple examples of the formula Zo = Zin × Zout
Section 5 – Propagation
Radio propagation: key concepts
5A1

Recall that under free space conditions e-m waves spread out according to an
inverse square law of power flux density and that the electric field strength,
measured in volts/metre, drops linearly with distance.
Note: Numerical calculations required at item 6E1 only

5A3

Recall that an e-m wave comprises E and H fields in phase, at right angles and
at right-angles to the direction of travel and the power flux density (watts /
Metre squared) is given by the product of E and H.
Recall that in circular polarisation, the polarisation of the wave rotates as it
propagates, with either a right-handed (clockwise from behind) or left-handed
polarisation.
Recall that this is often used for satellite communication where the orientation
of the satellite is indeterminate.
Recall that the transmit and receive antennas should have the same
polarisation.
Ionosphere

5B1

Understand the effects of Solar flares and sun spots on propagation.

5B2

Recall that the highest frequency that will be refracted back to the transmitter is
known as the Critical Frequency of Vertical Incidence (critical frequency).
Recall that the maximum usable frequency (MUF) will be higher than the
critical frequency.
Recall, in general terms how the MUF varies over the 24 hour cycle and the
variation in MUF from summer to winter.

5B3

Recall that propagation where the signals are reflected vertically back from the
ionosphere is known as Near Vertical Incidence Sky wave (NVIS).
Recall that NVIS is a technique employed on some low frequency bands (e.g.
5MHz) to make contacts over relatively short distances.

5B4

Recall that the ionosphere can change the polarisation of a radio wave.
VHF and above

5C3

Recall that contacts at VHF and above can be made by reflecting signals off
the lunar surface and that this is known as Earth-Moon-Earth (EME)
propagation.
Understand that as the moon is a poor reflector of radio frequency signals and
is a long way from earth, EME contacts generally need high power and high
gain antennas accurately pointed at the moon and very sensitive, low noise
receivers or the use of special low-signal strength modes to overcome the path
loss.
Recall that it is possible to make contacts on the VHF bands by reflecting
signals off the ionised gases created during an Aurora and that this occurs at
high Northerly and Southerly latitudes and that this is known as Auroral
propagation.
Recall that auroral ionised curtains form vertically in the ionosphere and that
movement of these curtains cause rapid flutter on the signals.
Other features

5D1

Recall the Galactic Noise is random noise originating outside the earth’s
atmosphere.

5D2

Recall the factors affecting a link budget; transmitter power, feeder losses,
antenna gains and path loss.
Recall that path loss includes spreading loss and obstruction losses.
Section 6 – Electro magnetic compatibility (EMC)
EMC concepts

6A2

Understand that the immunity of a device is affected by the nature of its
installation and that poor installation of an otherwise good item of equipment
can compromise its safe and compliant operation.

6A4

Recall that radio amateurs are not required to demonstrate compliance with
EMC standards for equipment they put into service but remain responsible for
complying with licence requirements regarding interference.
Sources of interference and their effects

6B1

Recall that some imported or home constructed electronic equipment may not
meet relevant EMC standards.
Recall that items containing radio communication facilities such as cordless
and mobile telephones and information technology communication equipment
may produce sufficiently strong signals to cause short range interference but
are otherwise generally satisfactory.
Recall that imported devices and toys may not be compliant with the relevant
regulations.

6B2

Understand that Blocking (or desensitisation) is an effect in a radio receiver
where a strong, constant level interfering signal e.g. FM either swamps the
wanted signal or drives the affected circuits out of their normal operating range
such that the received audio or data is severely attenuated or muted.
Understand that Cross-modulation is an effect in a radio receiver where the
interfering signal is varying in strength e.g. AM or SSB such that the
modulation on the interfering signal is added to the modulation on the wanted
signal such that both may be heard with varying clarity.

6B3

Recall that passive intermodulation products can be caused by corrosion in any
metallic junctions in metalwork, including transmitting and receiving antennas,
supports and guttering.
Routes of entry

6C1

Recall that amateur transmissions can enter audio stages via long speaker
leads or other interconnections.
Understand that any semiconductor or diode junction within an electronic
device can rectify unwanted RF.

6C2

Understand that many TV mast-head amplifiers are wide band devices and can
suffer from cross-modulation and overload causing intermodulation and
blocking and may also overload the TV.

6C3

Understand that amateur transmissions can be picked up by the intermediate
frequency stages of TV and radio receivers.
Understand the potential for image frequency interference to analogue and
digital radio.
Understand that television receivers and most broadcast radio receivers
employ superheterodyne circuits and recall some typical frequencies used in
radio and television receivers.
•
•
•
•
•

Medium Wave radio broadcast 526 - 1606kHz
VHF FM radio broadcast 87.5 - 108MHz
VHF DAB radio broadcast 174 - 230MHz
TV broadcast 470 - 694MHz
Radio IFs typically 455 - 500kHz and 10.7MHz.

Note: Current design digital TV receivers use a variety of Intermediate
frequencies between 4 and 39MHz.
Filtering and remedial measures
6D1

Understand the use of high, low, band pass and band stop (notch) filters of L, T
and π configuration including coaxial stubs as notch filters or traps, in
improving the immunity of affected devices.
Recall the use of ferrite beads or rings in internal and external filtering.

6D2

Understand the construction and use of a typical mains filter.
Identify a typical circuit of a braid breaking filter and a combined high pass/
braid breaking filter.
Understand their use.
Understand why a ferrite ring will attenuate common-mode currents without
affecting the differential-mode wanted signal.
Station design and antenna placement/general principles

6E1

Recall that reducing field strength to the minimum required for effective
communication is good radio housekeeping.
Apply the formula for the field strength surrounding an antenna given the ERP
and distance from it.

6E2

Understand good RF grounding and bonding techniques.
Understand the effects of inadequate RF grounding and bonding.

6E3

Recall that balanced antenna systems tend to cause fewer EMC problems than
unbalanced antennas.
Recall that balanced and unbalanced feeders should leave the antenna at
right-angles to minimise coupling.
Station design and antenna placement/mobile installations

6F1

Recall that advice on mobile installations is the Federation of Communication
Services UK Code of Practice for the installation of mobile radio and related
ancillary equipment in land based vehicles.

6F2

Understand how to minimise the likelihood of stray RF currents entering the
vehicle wiring and electronics.
Social aspects and testing

6G1

Recall the correct procedures for dealing with complaints of electromagnetic
disturbance caused by amateur transmissions.
Section 7 – Operating practices and procedures
Good operating practices and procedures

7A1

Understand the reasons why some stations may use split Tx and Rx
frequencies within a frequency band.
Band plans

7B1

Identify items on a typical band-plan (e.g. centre of activity, band width and
recommended modes).
Note: Questions will be limited to the 5MHz (60m) and 472kHz (600m) bands.
A copy of the relevant band plans will be available during the examination but
may not be ones in current use.
Reference Booklets containing examination band plans are available on the
RSGB web site.

7B2

Recall that band plans in other countries and IARU regions may not align with
the UK band plan.
Special events

7H1

Recall the purpose of special event stations and the format of their call signs.
Recall the process for obtaining a special event call sign.
Section 8 – Safety
Electricity

8A1

Recall that lethal voltages can exist in equipment and that live circuits may be
exposed as soon as the equipment case is removed.

8A2

Recall that in PME systems the main earth terminal is connected to the neutral
of the electricity service at the consumers’ premises.
Recall that under severe fault conditions PME systems have the potential to
cause fatal electric shocks and/or fires in amateur radio stations.
Recall that the RF earth in an amateur station should be connected to the PME
bonding point in accordance with the Local Authority building department’s
requirements or the IET Wiring Regulations to maintain safety under fault
conditions.

8A6

Understand that no work should be undertaken on live equipment unless it is
not practicable to do otherwise.
Understand that suitable precautions must be taken to avoid electric shock.

Working with RF
8D1

Recall that the International Commission for Non Ionising Radiation Protection
(ICNIRP) produces guidance for exposure to Radio Frequency fields.
Understand it is not advisable to exceed the recommended safe exposure
levels and that this is particularly applicable at locations open to the public.
Lightning

8E1

Recall that thunderstorms carry heavy static charges.
Understand that the static charge from thunderclouds can ionise the air to form
a low resistance path to ground, enabling a very high current to flow as a
lightning stroke.
Understand the risks to human life, domestic property and electronic
equipment associated with a direct strike and/or the build-up of static charges.
Understand that there is little that can be done to protect an amateur station
from a direct lightning strike, but that good static discharge systems can
prevent dangerous static charges building up on antenna systems during
thunderstorms.
Understand that disconnecting antenna feeders from radio equipment also
reduces the risks.
Working mobile and portable

8F4

Understand that operating in temporary premises and/or outdoors can
introduce new hazards i.e. overhead power lines, inadequate electrical
supplies, trailing cables, damp ground and excessive field strengths.
Recall the additional safety precautions that should be taken whilst operating in
temporary premises and/or outdoors i.e.
•
•
•
•
•

site survey/risk assessment,
cable routing/protection,
correct fusing,
use of Residual Current Devices (RCD's, RCBO's)
no adjustments or repairs to live equipment.

Recall that mains supplies in other countries may be of a different voltage or
frequency; utilise different plugs and sockets and that UK specified equipment
may not be suitable or hazardous if connected and used.
8F5

Understand that operating when mobile or maritime mobile can introduce new
hazards i.e. insecure equipment, long/flexible antennas, accidental shorts to
earth, lack of attention to driving.
Recall the additional safety precautions that should be taken whilst operating
mobile and/or maritime mobile i.e. secure equipment, cable routing/ protection,
correct fusing, use of hands-free equipment, attention to good radio
housekeeping.

8F6

Understand that a risk assessment should be performed when an activity could
present a hazard to yourself or others.
Understand that risk assessment involves identification of hazards and the
measures to mitigate the risk.
Recall a risk assessment needs to consider the likelihood of harm and the
severity of that harm.
Recall that the significant findings of risk assessments need to be recorded.
Recall that risk assessment records are important in law and for insurance
purposes.
Recall that risks should be expressed in understandable terms.
Recall that appropriate insurances should be obtained for all amateur radio
activities but in particular where the public could be involved.

8F7

Understand the risks associated with the use of electrical generators, earthing,
fuel stowage, refilling.
Section 9 – measurements and construction
Measurements

9A1

Understand the use of series multiplier resistors in analogue voltmeters and
shunts in ammeters.
Understand the effect of the test meter on the circuit under test.

9A3

Understand the effect of measurement tolerance, calibration accuracy and time
related drift on frequency measurements and the allowances to be made for
transmission bandwidths.

9A4

Understand that signal generators and similar devices will have a source
impedance and the effect on the signal level of attaching different load
impedances.
Recall that not all measuring equipment will have a 50Ω input impedance.
Understand that the choice of measuring equipment may have an effect on the
on the measurement result and on the object under test.

9A5

Understand that steady RF power may be determined by measuring the RF
potential difference across a dummy load and that a steady audio signal, e.g.
from an audio oscillator, will be required for AM and SSB measurements.
Understand the meaning of peak envelope power (PEP) of an SSB
transmission and that it may be determined using a peak reading power meter
or an oscilloscope and dummy load.

9A6

Recall the uses and limitations of crystal calibrators, digital frequency counters
and standard frequency transmissions.

9A7

Identify the circuit of an SWR meter using either a sense wire between the
inner and outer conductors of a coaxial line or a current transformer and
capacitive voltage tap.
Understand in simple terms how this leads to an SWR reading on devices
using a single meter, twin meters or cross-needle twin meter.

9A8

Understand the purpose and basic operation of an oscilloscope.
Calculate the frequency and voltage of a waveform from given data.

9A9

Understand the purpose and basic operation of a spectrum analyser.
Identify the fundamental and harmonics on a typical spectrum analyser display.
Decibels

9B1

Use the equations for decibel power, dB, dBW, dBm and voltage ratios dBV.
Components

9C1

Recall that temperature has an effect on the value of components. Those with
negative coefficients will reduce in value as temperature rises whereas those
with positive coefficients will increase in value.
Understand the effect this will have on tuned circuits and remedial measures.
Questions may include simple calculations.

Note: See combined syllabus for the Introduction and Examination Material parts of the
specification.

